Title: Agent Workflow Memory

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=NTAhi2JEEE

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Agent Workflow Memory 

Zora Zhiruo Wang 1 Jiayuan Mao 2 Daniel Fried 1 Graham Neubig 1

## Abstract 

Despite the potential of language model-based agents to solve real-world tasks such as web nav-igation, current methods still struggle with long-horizon tasks with complex action trajectories. In contrast, humans can flexibly solve complex tasks by learning reusable task workflows from past ex-periences and using them to guide future actions. To build agents that can similarly benefit from this process, we introduce Agent Workflow Memory (AWM), a method for inducing commonly reused routines, i.e., workflows , and selectively provid-ing workflows to the agent to guide subsequent generations. AWM flexibly applies to both offline 

and online scenarios, where agents induce work-flows from training examples beforehand or from test queries on the fly. We experiment on two major web navigation benchmarks — Mind2Web and WebArena — that collectively cover 1000+ tasks from 200+ domains across travel, shopping, and social media, among others. AWM substan-tially improves the baseline results by 24 .6% and 

51 .1% relative success rate on Mind2Web and WebArena while reducing the number of steps taken to solve WebArena tasks successfully. Fur-thermore, online AWM robustly generalizes in cross-task, website, and domain evaluations, sur-passing baselines from 8.9 to 14 .0 absolute points as train-test task distribution gaps widen. 1

## 1. Introduction 

Language model (LM) based agents are rapidly improving, and are now able to tackle digital tasks such as navigating the web (Zhou et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2023) or operating mobile apps (Rawles et al., 2023; 2024). Current agents mostly integrate a fixed set of given examples via training 

> 1

Carnegie Mellon University 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Zora Zhiruo Wang 

<zhiruow@cs.cmu.edu >.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s). 

> 1

https://github.com/zorazrw/agent-workflow-memory Get the coordinates of a place  

> Get the zip code of a place
> Decide if can drive from A to B in a given time
> Find a place by its name
> Find cafe near a place
> Get driving time from A to B
> Display the route from place A to B Find a Hilton hotel near this location, then show me the shortest walking path to a nearby supermarket …
> Gap widens to 22.5 after 40 examples
> AWM
> baseline

Figure 1. AWM enables agents to continuously induce and apply workflows to improve performance, compared to stagnant base-lines. We show results by AWM on the WebArena map split as an example. 

(Fu et al., 2024; Murty et al., 2024) or in-context learning (Zheng et al., 2024). This allows them to perform well on ac-tion sequences similar to those presented in these examples, but results in a lack of robustness to changes in task contexts or environments (Deng et al., 2023). Essentially, they fail to grasp the key to disentangling increasingly complex tasks — to extract and learn reusable task workflows shared across similar tasks and environments (Yu et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024a). Moreover, as agents solve each task separately, they do not learn from past successes and failures, and are therefore unable to adapt over time (Yoran et al., 2024). Motivated by how humans abstract common task routines from past experiences and apply such knowledge to guide future activities (Chi et al., 1981; 2014), we propose agent workflow memory (AWM) (§2) to realize a similar mech-anism in agents. AWM induces workflows from agent trajectories by extracting reusable routines, and then inte-grates these workflows into agent memory to guide future task-solving processes. Each workflow represents a goal with a common routine extracted from available action tra-jectories, which allows it to effectively capture the most essential and reusable skills agents need to acquire to suc-cessfully solve increasingly complex tasks. As an example, Figure 1 shows workflows induced by AWM on the We-bArena map test split of the benchmark (Zhou et al., 2024). AWM starts with a basic set of built-in actions and solves new tasks in a streaming manner, continuously inducing workflows from the task at hand, e.g., learning to “find a 1Agent Workflow Memory 

place by its name” from the first few examples. Moreover, AWM continues to build more complex workflows on top of new experiences and previously acquired workflows. For example, the “find a place by its name” workflow, once induced, effectively serves as a subgoal to build a more com-plex workflow “get the zip code of a place.” Such continual learning mechanisms create a snowball effect to induce and apply increasingly complex workflows while expanding the agent memory, often yielding a substantial performance gap over a vanilla agent that does not adapt. This gap over the baseline rises as high as 22 .5 points on WebArena after rolling over only tens of examples (as shown by Figure 1). AWM readily operates in both offline and online scenar-ios, where annotated examples are either available or non-existent. When high-quality annotated examples are avail-able for a task, AWM operating in an offline fashion can extract reusable workflows from these canonical examples and integrate them into memory to assist test-time inference. Even if no annotated examples exist, AWM online can also run in an supervision-free setting , where it iteratively in-duces workflows from self-generated past predictions that are judged correct by an evaluator module. We evaluate AWM on two agent web navigation bench-marks (§3): WebArena, which provides rigorous execution-based evaluation (Zhou et al., 2024), and Mind2Web, which emphasizes broad tasks and domain coverage (Deng et al., 2023). On WebArena, AWM improves over the top pub-lished autonomous method (Drouin et al., 2024) by 51 .1%relative success rate, and even outperforms methods using human expert written workflows (Sodhi et al., 2023) by 

7.9%. On Mind2Web, AWM effectively improves the cross-task results by 24 .6% in relative step-wise success rate. We further demonstrate the generalizability of AWM on both datasets. On WebArena, we create a cross-template subset where each example is instantiated from different task templates. AWM still consistently surpasses all baseline approaches, demonstrating its reliable cross-task workflow adaptability (§3.1). On Mind2Web, we evaluate AWM on the cross-website and cross-domain test splits to examine its domain generality, where it scores 8.9–14 .0 absolute points higher over baseline, and the margins become more substan-tial as the train-test distribution gap widens (§3.2). Both results show the superior generalization of AWM across tasks, websites, and domains. 

## 2. Agent Workflow Memory 

In this section, we first describe the web navigation task (§2.1), then introduce the workflow representation (§2.2), and describe the mechanism of AWM as well as various usage scenarios (§2.3). 

2.1. Problem Statement 

For the purpose of this paper, we consider agents with a lan-guage model backbone L and text-based memory M , where the base memory contains documentation of built-in actions such as CLICK and TYPE .2 To solve a task specified by a natural language (NL) instruction q, the agent acts in an environment defined by a transition function T . For each time step ti, the environment state si gives observation oi,which is then passed into the model to generate action ai

via L(q, M, o i) → ai. The action is executed in the envi-ronment and changes the state as T (si, a i) → si+1 . This observe-act loop iterates until the model predicts the stop action ai =STOP , or reaches a task termination condition, e.g., a maximum pre-determined number of steps. Each completed task forms an experience e, which com-prises an NL instruction q and a trajectory of steps attempt-ing to solve the task, where each step p contains the agent observation o obtained from the current state, and action taken by the agent a, formulated as p = ( o, a ). Our goal is to induce useful workflows W = {w} from the set of experiences E = {e} constructed from past or collected examples, using an induction module I via I(E) → W .We add induced workflows into the agent memory M as guidance for subsequent task-solving. Next, we introduce the workflow representation design, workflow induction method, and agent memory update with workflows in varied setups. 

2.2. Workflow Representation 

Similar to an experience, a workflow comprises two com-ponents: first, a textual description of the workflow d; and second, a series of steps to finish the workflow (p1, p 2, · · · ),as shown in Figure 2. 

Workflow Description To present workflows in a format where agents can learn from them properly, it is impor-tant to describe the high-level goal of the series of actions. Therefore, we associate each workflow with an NL task description d, essentially a summary of the workflow’s func-tion, by heuristically extracting from experience instructions or summarizing with an LM (see §2.3). 

Workflow Trajectory The workflow trajectory contains a series of steps (p1, p 2, · · · ) to finish the process described in d. Each p consists of three parts, demonstrated in pn

in Figure 2, Step 3. (1) A description of the current envi-ronment state in NL, such as “Order {id } is shown”; (2) The reasoning process elaborated by the agent to decide which action to generate based on observations, such as “Order {id } is found, I will now terminate the task.”; and 

> 2Memory is usually implemented as a system prompt or auxil-iary information in the main prompt context.

2Agent Workflow Memory Environment 

state s

> LM Backbone

Memory 

Agent     

> action
> observation
> Who ordered order #0130?
> # I need to click the “Orders” link to see all orders.
> click(‘126’) # id of the button
> # I need to find order 0130 in the current page. scroll(0, 200) … … … … # The current page shows order 0130. send_msg_to_user(“Emma Lopez”) stop()
> Step 1. Obtain Actions (annotate/generate/…)
> Step 2. Trajectory Evaluation
> Query solved correctly?
> YES  NO pass
> Step 3. Induce Workflows
> ❖Workflow Description d
> This workflow aims to find an customer order with specified ID.
> ❖Workflow Trajectory [env desc] The current page shows.. [reason] I need to click “Orders” to.. [action] click(‘order-link-id’) … … … … [env desc] Order {id} is shown. [reason] Order {id} is found, I will now terminate the task. [action] stop()
> p1
> pn
> …
> integrate into memory

Figure 2. Illustration of our AWM pipeline: an agent takes actions to solve given queries, induces workflows from successful ones, and integrates them into memory. 

(3) an action represented as an executable program over the environment, i.e., stop() that realizes termination. 

2.3. Inducing and Using Workflows 

At the core of AWM is an induction module I that induces a set of workflows W from one or more past agent experiences 

E = {ei}mi=1 . Each experience e = ( q, P e) contains an NL task instruction q and an action trajectory that consists of a sequence of steps (observation and action) P e = ( pe

> 1

, ..., p en)

that were taken to solve q. The workflow induction module operates by taking in E and producing a set of workflows, as I(E) → W = {w} = {(dj , P dj )}.

LM-based Workflow Induction To produce workflows that more accurately capture reusable trajectories across tasks, we propose an LM-based module I that prompts the agent to extract common sub-routines from one or more input experiences. Different from task instructions that specify concrete, less-repetitive tasks, e.g., “Buy dry cat food on Amazon and deliver to my address”, we deliberately prompt models to in-duce workflows at finer granularities, i.e., a sub-task “search for a product on Amazon” that frequently re-appears as part of multiple similar instructions. Meanwhile, instead of giving example-specific values (e.g., “dry cat food”), we enhance workflow generality by abstracting out example-specific contexts, i.e., replacing “dry cat food” with a more general name “ {product-name }” by specifying this in the workflow induction prompts. These workflows are seg-mented (based on double-line breaks in the model output) and stored separately in the workflow memory. Refer to §A for the exact model prompts, example workflows, and an examination of quality. 3

> 3

We also explore a rule-based workflow induction method. See §B for more detailed experiments. 

After the workflows W are induced, they are then integrated into the agent as auxiliary memory, M + W → Mw, where 

M stands for the original agent memory, and Mw stands for the agent memory augmented with induced workflows. When solving a given instruction q, the agent now produces a series of actions by L(q, M w, o ) = L(q, M + W, o ) → a.Next, we introduce AWM in use in two scenarios: 

Offline Scenario AWM can operate in an offline scenario when additional canonical experiences are available, such as data annotated by humans or synthesized by models. In this case, we perform workflow induction and utilization in two standalone processes. As shown in Figure 3 (left), AWM first takes in all training examples from a website by concatenating them into a single prompt, and feeds them to the LM to create a set of workflows at ‘training’ time; 

I(Etrain ) → W offline . Second, AWM incorporates all in-duced workflows into the agent memory at inference time to solve test instructions L(q, M + Woffline , o test  

> i

) → atest  

> i

.Since the workflows are fully induced before test-time infer-ence, the agent uses the same workflow memory Woffline 

to solve each test. 

Online Scenario Extra canonical experiences are not al-ways available or easy to collect, especially those that cover the same domains and tasks as the test instructions. AWM also works in an online, supervision-free setting, where only test queries are needed. As in Figure 3 (right), agents with AWM online process test queries in a streaming fashion, where the agents conduct the loop of induce, integrate, and utilize workflows after running inference for each test task. “Training” w/ extra examples Infer test examples w/ workflows    

> apply workflows
> 2
> workflow add into memory
> induce workflows
> 1
> Test examples passed in a stream
> Continuously adding workflows into agent memory
> induce
> … …
> 1
> 2
> 1
> 2
> apply grow over time …
> apply workflows for test inference

Offline Online Test examples passed in a stream  

> Continuously adding workflows into agent memory
> … …
> induce 1
> 1
> 2
> 2apply grow over time …
> apply workflows for test inference

Figure 3. Illustration of AWM offline (left) and AWM online (right). 

Concretely, the agent starts with the default memory M ;given the t-th test instruction qt passed into the agent, the agent attempts to solve the task by generating an action trajectory (pt

> 1

, p t

> 2

, · · · ), which collectively forms an expe-rience et = ( qt, {pt}). We adopt the LM-based evalua-tion model of Pan et al. (2024) to output a binary label, 

Leval (et) ∈ { 0, 1}, that judges if et successfully solves qt

by prompting a neural model. If et is predicted as success, i.e., 1, we then transform it into workflow(s) I(et) → { wt}

and add {wt} into the agent memory M t + {wt} → M t+1 ,which serves as the agent memory to process the t + 1 -th instruction. As depicted in Figure 3 (right), we continue this memory-updating process by iteratively predicting actions for and inducing workflows from streamed test instructions, until all tests are processed. We evaluate the success rate of 3Agent Workflow Memory 

predicted action trajectories {pt} for all tests. 

## 3. Experiments 

In this section, we experiment on two major web naviga-tion benchmarks – WebArena (§3.1) and Mind2Web (§3.2). For each benchmark, we first introduce the benchmark and top-performing baseline methods, then present our AWM approach and showcase its ability to achieve superior task success and generalization across varied setups. For both benchmarks, we conduct AWM on a website ba-sis. In other words, we group examples by their associated websites, and respectively run AWM on each group. This mechanism maintains a small collection of workflows that are nonetheless relevant to the test tasks. 

3.1. WebArena 

WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024) provides 812 web navigation tasks on five websites that cover four common application domains: e-commerce, social forum discussions, collabora-tive software development, and content management. Most importantly, WebArena supports rigorous evaluation on the functional correctness of agent trajectories. We adopt the current state-of-the-art method without human-annotated site-specific knowledge, BrowserGym (Drouin et al., 2024), which altered the agent default action space. We adopt the BrowserGym framework and its default action space, and represent webpages using accessibility trees, fol-lowing the environment representation in Zhou et al. (2024). Because BrowserGym inputs both webpage HTML and accessibility tree representations, to keep a fair compari-son with our method, we also run the BrowserGym ver-sion with only accessibility tree webpage representations, denoted as BrowserGym ax −tree . We also compare to the SteP method (Sodhi et al., 2023), which uses 14 human ex-pert written workflows tailored to solving WebArena. Our method, in contrast, uses no human supervision and is not tailored to the WebArena setting. Following the baseline approaches, we use GPT-4o (gpt-4o-2024-05-13 ) with a temperature of 0.0 to en-sure mostly stable model outputs. Because WebArena only has test examples and no additional high-quality, domain-aligned examples exist, we only conduct AWM in the online setting as in §2.3. 3.1.1. M AIN RESULTS 

As shown in Table 1, our AWM achieves the best published results on WebArena, surpassing the BrowserGym base-line by 12 .0 absolute points and 51 .1% relative increase in overall success rate. Notably, AWM also outperforms SteP, which uses strong domain-specific supervision from human-written workflows, by a 7.6% relative increase in overall success rate. According to the breakdown on five websites, our AWM method substantially enhances the agent perfor-mance across all websites over the BrowserGym baseline, by 11 .8–30 .7 absolute points, indicating its general applica-bility across varied domains and tasks. Beyond task success, we also evaluate the average number of steps the agent takes to solve a task, as shown in the right-most column in Table 1. AWM conducts about 2.0 fewer steps per example than the BrowserGym baseline. Further compared to the Autoeval (Pan et al., 2024) method, which necessitates additional evaluation and refinement steps to solve tasks correctly, our AWM approach uses 40 .8 fewer steps on average. See §D for more efficiency discussions. Both comparisons show that AWM obtains high success rates while maintaining efficient trajectories. Rapid learning phase  

> Stable inference phase
> Figure 4. AWM enables rapid learning from a small amount of data (about 40 queries), using WebArena map split as an example.

3.1.2. EFFICIENT LEARNING FROM SMALL AMOUNTS OF DATA 

To demonstrate the behavior of the AWM online method, we illustrate the cumulative success rate over the process of online evaluation, by evaluating the average success rate of the first k finished examples. As in Figure 4, the agent exhibits a fast learning curve in the beginning (between 0–40 examples), by acquiring the most essential workflows, which results in higher success rates. Afterward, agents learn more advanced workflows (Figure 1), while success rates gradually stabilize to the highest point in the early learning phase. This showcases AWM’s efficient learning process, which substantially im-proves performance with merely tens of examples. 3.1.3. CROSS -TEMPLATE WORKFLOW GENERALIZATION 

Some tasks in WebArena have highly overlapping canonical trajectories, due to the benchmark construction process that instantiates multiple examples from a single underlying task template. AWM intuitively improves in-template success rate, that is, given one workflow induced from a successful example, it would be theoretically easier to solve all other examples generated from the same task template. 4Agent Workflow Memory 

Table 1. Task success rate on WebArena using gpt-4 , and score breakdown on five website splits. 

Method Total SR Shopping CMS Reddit GitLab Maps # Steps 

With human engineered workflows 

*SteP (Sodhi et al., 2023) 33.0 37.0 24.0 59.0 32.0 30.0 -

Autonomous agent only 

WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024) 14.9 14.0 11.0 6.0 15.0 16.0 -AutoEval (Pan et al., 2024) 20.2 25.5 18.1 25.4 28.6 31.9 46.7 BrowserGym (Drouin et al., 2024) 23.5 - - - - - -BrowserGym ax −tree 15.0 17.2 14.8 20.2 19.0 25.5 7.9 AWM ( OURS ) 35.5 30.8 29.1 50.9 31.8 43.3 5.9 

To confirm that the benefits of AWM are not just from learn-ing workflows that help only within a template, and investi-gate whether AWM can obtain cross-template ( ≈cross-task) generalization, we extract a subset of WebArena examples sourcing from non-overlapping templates, by grouping ex-amples by their templates and randomly choosing one ex-ample from each template group. We run AWM on this cross-template subset and examine if it achieves similar performance gains. As shown in Table 2, AWM still achieves the highest per-formance, overall and on each website split. These results demonstrate that AWM induced workflows can effectively generalize across different tasks, i.e., examples instantiated from different task templates. Find a place by its name Get the zip code of a place 

> Task Objective: Show me {location} on the map Action Trajectory: # To find the {location}, I will search for "{location}" on OpenStreetMap.
> Task Objective: Tell me the zip of code of {location} Action Trajectory:
> To find the zip code of {location}, I will first search for {location} on OpenStreetMap. Once located, I will extract the zip code from the map or the associated information
> # The search results have provided multiple locations…. This location includes the zip code.
> fill('145', {location}) click('147')
> send_msg_to_user("The zip code is {zip-code}")
> fill('145', {location}) click('147')
> Adopt the first few steps from earlier, easier workflows
> Add more steps to build increasingly complex workflows

Find a place by its name Get the zip code of a place 

> Task Objective: Show me {location} on the map Action Trajectory: # To find the {location}, I will search for "{location}" on OpenStreetMap.
> Task Objective: Tell me the zip of code of {location} Action Trajectory:
> To find the zip code of {location}, I will first search for {location} on OpenStreetMap. Once located, I will extract the zip code from the map or the associated information
> # The search results have provided multiple locations…. This location includes the zip code.
> fill('145', {location}) click('147')
> send_msg_to_user("The zip code is {zip-code}")
> fill('145', {location}) click('147')
> Adopt the first few steps from earlier, easier workflows
> Add more steps to build increasingly complex workflows

Figure 5. AWM builds increasingly complex workflows over time, by learning from past examples and earlier workflows. 

Building increasingly complex workflows To more in-tuitively demonstrate AWM’s cross-template generalization and ability to build increasingly complex workflows (as ex-emplified in Figure 1), we conduct a case study to illustrate the workflow mechanism behind it. As exemplified in Figure 5, the agent creates and learns the “Find a place by its name” workflow in the early stage of the online process by summarizing past examples. Later, when encountering an example that further asks to obtain the zip code of the location, AWM agent learns to adopt the first few steps to find locations by following the existing workflow, and then conducts further steps to obtain the zip code of the place found. Integrating these new steps upon the vanilla find location task, the agent successfully builds a more complex workflow, i.e., “get the zip code of a place”. We further examine whether example ordering affects this gradual induction process in §E. 

3.2. Mind2Web 

Mind2Web (Deng et al., 2023) features web navigation in cross-task, website, and domain settings, stressing the gen-erality of agents on versatile operations and environments. Each task in Mind2Web has a fixed number of steps; at each step, the agent needs to predict an action, which is evaluated by: (1) element accuracy : to check if the correct page element is selected, (2) action F 1 to check if the action taken on the element is correct, and aggregating (1) and (2) yields (3) step success rate which checks that both element and action selection are correct at the current step. Lastly, after completing every step in the given task, the last metric (4) task-level success rate measures if all intermediate steps are successfully conducted for this task, i.e., all steps for this task score 1 under metric (3). Because Mind2Web provides a training set that covers part of the tested websites (the cross-task split), we explore both the offline setting that induces workflows from the training set and applies to test sets, and the online setting, where we stream workflow induction and inference on test queries (§2.3). Since we focus on LM-based agents that only take textual inputs, we compare AWM to two state-of-the-art methods, MindAct (Deng et al., 2023) and Synapse (Zheng et al., 2024). MindAct introduces webpage element filtering and multi-choice task format to ease observation processing, and Synapse changes the format to a trajectory style and aug-ments retrieved relevant examples. We integrate the element filtering adopted in both methods, and added workflows instead of retrieved examples in Synapse, to verify the supe-riority of reusable workflows over concrete examples. To fairly compare with all baseline methods, we run AWM with both gpt-3.5-turbo and gpt-4 models with tem-perature 0.0. We use the same model for neural workflow induction and agent action generation. 3.2.1. M AIN RESULTS 

We first run with AWM offline using both GPT variants, and find that AWM consistently obtains the highest success rate in both step and task levels, leading to 4.0–8.9% rela-5Agent Workflow Memory                                                                        

> Table 2. Task success rate on the cross-template subset of WebArena, as well as the result breakdown on each website split. We mark the number of examples for each website split under the name.
> Method Total SR Shopping CMS Reddit GitLab Maps (51) (45) (24) (45) (32)
> With human engineered workflows
> *SteP (Sodhi et al., 2023) 32.1 26.5 29.3 52.2 27.3 36.4
> Autonomous agent only
> AutoEval (Pan et al., 2024) 23.2 12.2 17.1 21.7 31.8 36.4 BrowserGym ax −tree 20.5 10.4 17.8 23.1 27.3 28.6 AWM ( OURS )33.2 24.5 29.3 52.2 31.8 39.4
> Table 3. AWM offline results on Mind2Web cross-task dataset. Elem Acc and SR are short for element accuracy and success rate. We footnote the GPT variant used by each method, 3.5
> and 4stands for gpt-3.5-turbo and gpt-4 , respectively. We highlight the best result within the same model variant.
> Method Elem Acc Action F 1Step SR SR
> MindAct 3.520.3 56.6 17.4 0.8 CogAgent 3.5--18.6 -Synapse 3.534.0 -30.6 2.4 AWM 3.539.0 52.8 34.6 2.8
> MindAct 441.6 60.6 36.2 2.0 AWM 450.6 57.3 45.1 4.8

tive and 0.4–2.8 absolute points increases in step-wise and task-wise success rates than the baselines — Synapse with 

gpt-3.5-turbo and MindAct with gpt-4 . Decompos-ing the step success rate by element and action selection and accuracy, we notice the increases mainly come from more accurate element selection, as indicated by the 5.0–9.0

element accuracy increase in Table 3. 

Abstract sub-routines vs. concrete experiences More specifically, compared to the Synapse (Zheng et al., 2024) method that retrieves the most relevant training examples, AWM achieves a +5 .0 element accuracy and leads to a +4 .0

increase in step success rate. While augmenting concrete, full examples may bias agents to select elements similar to those presented in the given examples, AWM introduces less bias on element selection via its abstract representation of example-specific contexts in workflows, and therefore enables higher step success rates. Furthermore, AWM integrates frequently-used sub-routines, which can be more flexibly and readily leveraged across test examples, compared to the full example trajectories used by Synapse, which are less likely to appear multiple times. In general, our results indicate that the abstract, reusable nature of workflows contributes to the superiority of the AWM method. 

Learn to diverge from workflow guidelines Despite more accurate element selection, AWM gets slightly lower action F 1 scores than MindAct, possibly because the aug-mented workflows may guide the agent to take certain ac-tions aligning to the workflows, which are not always rel-evant to the particular environment state at hand. While following the workflows generally results in more success-ful task trajectories, agents still encounter challenges in identifying places to diverge from the workflow guidelines. 3.2.2. O NLINE AWM E NABLES GENERALIZATION 

Beyond the offline induction setting, we further explore the AWM in the online setting, similar to the WebArena experi-ment setup in §3.1, where no additional training examples are needed besides test queries. This naturally facilitates cross-website and cross-domain generalization, which we examine on the two other splits provided by the Mind2Web dataset: cross-website and cross-domain tests. In addition to the MindAct baseline, we additionally set bars with our AWM offline setup, by randomly selecting work-flows induced from the training set as memory augmenta-tions. Specifically, for cross-website examples, we select workflows from the same domain; for the cross-domain setting, we randomly select workflows from all domains. We conduct AWM online by iteratively inducing, integrat-ing, and utilizing workflows over test inferences. We also explore AWM offline +online in §C. As shown in Table 4, both AWM online and AWM offline 

surpass the MindAct baseline by a large margin, resulting in 7.4–8.9, 3.6–3.8, and 14 .0–16 .9 absolute point improve-ments in step success rates, in cross-task, cross-website, and cross-domain scenarios. 

In-domain, cross-task scenario When tested in-domain, AWM online and AWM offline perform comparably to each other. When inspecting the model behaviors in detail, we notice the pros and cons of each method. AWM online in-duces workflows from model-predicted trajectories that are not always correct, thus can lead to incorrect workflows that degrade model performance. On the other hand, the training and test examples on some websites vary in task distribu-tions (e.g., training examples cover how to buy items on Amazon, test examples ask for job applications to Amazon careers.). AWM online naturally resolves this train-test gap 6Agent Workflow Memory                                                       

> Table 4. Success rate on Mind2Web cross-task, cross-website, and cross-domain generalization test, using gpt-4 model. EA is short for element accuracy and AF 1is short for action F 1.
> Method Cross-Task Cross-Website Cross-Domain
> EA AF 1Step SR SR EA AF 1Step SR SR EA AF 1Step SR SR MindAct* 41.6 60.6 36.2 2.0 35.8 51.1 30.1 2.0 21.6 52.8 26.4 2.0 AWM offline 50.6 57.3 45.1 4.8 41.4 46.2 33.7 2.3 36.4 41.6 32.6 0.7 AWM online 50.0 56.4 43.6 4.0 42.1 45.1 33.9 1.6 40.9 46.3 35.5 1.7

because its operating process only involves test queries and environments, therefore yields workflows that are presum-ably more targeted toward the test distribution, which in turn, leads to higher success rates overall. Nonetheless, if distribution-matching, high-quality training examples are available, AWM offline could bring more benefit by alleviat-ing the gap issue, as the slightly higher cross-tasks scores of AWM offline in Table 4. 

Extending to unseen websites and domains When applied on unseen websites or domains, AWM online 

demonstrates greater generalization abilities, compared to AWM offline . The performance margin of AWM online (over AWM offline ) widens as the domain gaps between train-ing and testing data widen from different websites (e.g., 

apple to bestbuy ) to different domains (e.g., macys in shopping domain to reddit in social media domain). Be-cause AWM online does not require nor rely on informa-tion from the training data, it is not affected by any do-main gaps. Nonetheless, as demonstrated by the substantial improvements of AWM offline over the MindAct baseline, AWM offline still demonstrates that models can benefit from mechanistically similar workflows from the previously in-duced workflow repository. 

## 4. Exploring Optimal Workflow Representations 

In this section, we experiment with other possible alterna-tives to better represent the workflows. Specifically, we ablate workflows in sub-routine, abstract formats (§4.1), explore workflows in descriptive texts (§4.2), and lastly, be-yond the default workflows that describe environment state in NL, we compare strengthened observations with website HTML within workflow steps (§4.3). 

4.1. How much does the sub-routine, abstract format contribute? 

In this section, we compare our abstract, sub-routine-based induction method using LMs to a rule-based method without context and sub-routine abstraction. Specifically, our rule-based induction Irule first extracts the action sequence (e.g., CLICK → CLICK → TYPE ) of each experience and deduplicates experiences by their action sequence. In each unique experience, we then remove the steps whose action cannot be executed on the environment. We take these unique, validated experiences as workflows. Find more detailed descriptions in §B.         

> Table 5. AWM success rate on WebArena using gpt-4 , with rule-and lm-based induction.
> Method Total SR # Steps
> AWM rule 35.6 6.3 AWM lm 35.5 5.9

WebArena Results As shown in Table 5, using rule- and LM-based workflow induction performs comparably, with a small 0.1 gap in success rate; the LM-based method appears more efficient and uses 0.4 fewer steps. Our manual analysis found workflows produced by the LM-based induction mod-ule Ilm are finer-grained, preventing agents from following unnecessary steps that sometimes appear in rule-induced workflows, hence making the task-solving process slightly more efficient.  

> Table 6. AWM results with different workflow induction methods on Mind2Web cross-task dataset.

Method Elem Acc Action F 1 Step SR SR 

MindAct 4 41.6 60.6 36.2 2.0 AWM 4,rule 49.5 57.0 43.4 2.0 AWM 4,lm 50.6 57.3 45.1 4.8 

Mind2Web Results In Table 6, compared to AWM rule ,AWM lm improves by a 2.8 margin. While augmenting concrete, full examples may bias agents to select elements similar to those presented in the given examples, AWM  

> lm

introduces less bias on element selection via its abstract representation of example-specific contexts in workflows. Further, AWM lm uses frequently-used sub-routines, which can be more flexibly and readily utilized across test exam-ples, compared to the full example trajectories induced by AWM rule , which are less likely to appear multiple times. In general, our results indicate that the abstract, reusable nature of workflows contributes to the efficacy of AWM lm 

method. 

4.2. Workflows in Descriptive Texts 

AWM represents workflow steps in a program format. In this section, we compare with a textual format for work-7Agent Workflow Memory 

flows, to understand whether text or code serves as a better format for agent memory. More concretely, we prompt 

gpt-3.5-turbo to verbalize the action trajectory in the workflows induced in earlier experiments. For example, from an action CLICK( {submit-id }), its verbalized NL representation reads similar to “ CLICK the submit but-ton”. We use the same textual observation and thoughts from code actions as observation and thoughts in these text actions.                  

> Table 7. Mind2Web cross-task results with AWM using code and text workflows.
> Method Elem Acc Action F 1Step SR SR
> MindAct 41.6 60.6 36.2 2.0 AWM 50.6 57.3 45.1 4.8
> AWM text 51.2 57.4 45.4 3.6

From the results in Table 7, AWM text achieves slightly higher element selection accuracy and step success rate, by 

0.6 and 0.3 points, respectively, yet degrades 1.2 in task suc-cess rate. Overall, we do not find substantial performance variance between workflows represented in text and code formats, indicating that both forms can be effective. See §F for more studies on executable action workflows. 

4.3. Environment Abstraction in Workflows 

AWM describes intermediate webpage states using NL, yet showing concrete states may be helpful to better ground agents on the environment. Since a webpage’s full HTML can be overly long, we filter the webpage representation using the relevance predictor of Deng et al. (2023), and augment each workflow step with this shortened HTML that only has elements predicted as relevant. We run 

gpt-3.5-turbo with only descriptions, only HTML, and both types of content.                      

> Table 8. Mind2Web results using GPT-3.5-turbo with different en-vironment representations.
> Desc. HTML Elem Acc Act F 1Step SR SR
> ✓✗39.0 52.8 34.6 2.8
> ✗✓38.1 54.0 33.8 2.8
> ✓✓37.1 51.3 32.9 2.0

As shown in Table 8, NL description of states is more useful than HTML, as replacing NL with HTML leads to a slight 

0.8 drop in step success rate. Interestingly, using both NL and filtered HTML leads to worse results. We conjecture the reason to be two-fold. First, adding NL and HTML sub-stantially increases the context length, thus making it harder for models to handle things correctly. Second, the filtered HTML has a substantial number of irrelevant items (miss-ing all correct elements 47% of the time) thus potentially contradicting NL descriptions and impairing agent abilities. 

## 5. Related Work 

Web Agent Benchmarks The first modern and widely used web agent benchmark is Shi et al. (2017)’s MiniWob, which evaluates across various scenarios such as flight book-ing. (Liu et al., 2018) then created MiniWob++ with extra challenges. More recently, WebShop (Yao et al., 2022) fea-tures a simulated e-commerce website and crowd-sourced text instructions. WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024) integrates four more websites and enables realistic execution-based evaluations, and VisualWebArena (Koh et al., 2024) extends with tasks that necessitate visual inputs. Mind2Web (Deng et al., 2023) proposes versatile tasks and stresses agent gen-eralization across websites and domains. We use WebArena and Mind2Web to evaluate our method’s task success and generality. 

Enhancing Agents for Complex Tasks Many works im-prove agents by modifying their action space, such as con-straining its action search space (Liu et al., 2018), enabling LM self-feedback to refine predicted actions (Sun et al., 2023), or incorporating human-designed actions to certain tasks (Sodhi et al., 2023; Sarch et al., 2024). Other works explore ways to augment agent memory, such as adding example demonstrations in context (Haluptzok et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2024). However, high-quality examples are not always available or easy to collect. Our AWM can flexibly operate even when auxiliary examples are non-existent and only test queries are available. 

Learning Common Procedures from Experiences 

Some works use full examples (Zheng et al., 2024) as con-text for an agent, yet they entangle with example-specific contexts and face challenges in extrapolating to other tasks or domains (Majumder et al., 2023). Many works propose to extract frequently reused sub-routines from experiences with rule-based (Ellis et al., 2023; Bowers et al., 2023; Grand et al., 2023) or LM-based methods (Cai et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024c;a) methods, and use them as auxiliary skills to ease future task-solving (Oh et al., 2017; Liang et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023; Mao et al., 2023). We explored both rule- and LM-based methods to induce reusable workflows, and use them flexibly as context guidance that are free of environment grounding issues. 

## 6. Conclusion 

We propose agent workflow memory that induces, augments, and uses workflows, offline from available examples or purely online at inference time. We evaluate AWM on WebArena and Mind2Web, and achieve 24 .6% and 51 .1%relative increases in task success rate. AWM also demon-strates its superior generalization abilities across tasks, web-sites, and domains. We hope AWM sheds insight on and boosts advances in dynamic memory building and agent adaptations on varied digital tasks. 8Agent Workflow Memory 

## Acknowledgments 

We thank Frank Xu, Jiayi Pan, Vijay Viswanathan, Chenglei Si, and Jason Wu for their helpful discussions during the early stage of this project. We would like to thank members of NeuLab and DFried Lab at Carnegie Mellon University for their valuable feedback and comments on the paper. Zora Zhiruo Wang is supported by the CMU Presidential Fellowship and Fujitsu Research. 

## Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance large language model-supported digital agents. While utilizing digital agents in practice can facilitate users in completing computer-using tasks, these agents may not perform per-fectly accurately, and ensuring safety and privacy through-out the usage is still an open problem in the field. 

## References 

Bowers, M., Olausson, T. X., Wong, L., Grand, G., Tenen-baum, J. B., Ellis, K., and Solar-Lezama, A. Top-down synthesis for library learning. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 7(POPL), jan 2023. doi: 10.1145/3571234. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3571234. Cai, T., Wang, X., Ma, T., Chen, X., and Zhou, D. Large language models as tool makers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17126 , 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2305. 17126. Chi, M. T., Feltovich, P. J., and Glaser, R. Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices. Cognitive science , 5(2):121–152, 1981. Chi, M. T., Glaser, R., and Farr, M. J. The nature of expertise .Psychology Press, 2014. Deng, X., Gu, Y., Zheng, B., Chen, S., Stevens, S., Wang, B., Sun, H., and Su, Y. Mind2web: Towards a gener-alist agent for the web. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=kiYqbO3wqw. Drouin, A., Gasse, M., Caccia, M., Laradji, I. H., Del Verme, M., Marty, T., Boisvert, L., Thakkar, M., Cappart, Q., Vazquez, D., et al. Workarena: How capable are web agents at solving common knowledge work tasks? arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07718 , 2024. Ellis, K., Wong, L., Nye, M., Sable-Meyer, M., Cary, L., Anaya Pozo, L., Hewitt, L., Solar-Lezama, A., and Tenen-baum, J. B. Dreamcoder: growing generalizable, inter-pretable knowledge with wake–sleep bayesian program learning. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 381(2251):20220050, 2023. Fu, Y., Kim, D.-K., Kim, J., Sohn, S., Logeswaran, L., Bae, K., and Lee, H. Autoguide: Automated generation and selection of state-aware guidelines for large language model agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08978 , 2024. Grand, G., Wong, L., Bowers, M., Olausson, T. X., Liu, M., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Andreas, J. Lilo: Learning interpretable libraries by compressing and documenting code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19791 , 2023. Haluptzok, P., Bowers, M., and Kalai, A. T. Language models can teach themselves to program better. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= SaRj2ka1XZ3. Koh, J. Y., Lo, R., Jang, L., Duvvur, V., Lim, M. C., Huang, P.-Y., Neubig, G., Zhou, S., Salakhutdinov, R., and Fried, D. Visualwebarena: Evaluating multimodal agents on realistic visual web tasks. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Large Language Model (LLM) Agents , 2024. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=RPKxrKTJbj. Liang, J., Huang, W., Xia, F., Xu, P., Hausman, K., Ichter, B., Florence, P., and Zeng, A. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 9493–9500. IEEE, 2023. Liu, E. Z., Guu, K., Pasupat, P., and Liang, P. Reinforcement learning on web interfaces using workflow-guided explo-ration. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= ryTp3f-0-. Majumder, B. P., Mishra, B. D., Jansen, P., Tafjord, O., Tandon, N., Zhang, L., Callison-Burch, C., and Clark, P. Clin: A continually learning language agent for rapid task adaptation and generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10134 , 2023. Mao, J., Lozano-P ´erez, T., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Kael-bling, L. P. Learning reusable manipulation strategies. In 

Conference on Robot Learning , pp. 1467–1483. PMLR, 2023. Murty, S., Manning, C., Shaw, P., Joshi, M., and Lee, K. Bagel: Bootstrapping agents by guiding exploration with language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08140 , 2024. Oh, J., Singh, S., Lee, H., and Kohli, P. Zero-shot task gen-eralization with multi-task deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 2661–2670. PMLR, 2017. 9Agent Workflow Memory 

Pan, J., Zhang, Y., Tomlin, N., Zhou, Y., Levine, S., and Suhr, A. Autonomous evaluation and refinement of digital agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06474 , 2024. Rawles, C., Li, A., Rodriguez, D., Riva, O., and Lillicrap, T. P. Androidinthewild: A large-scale dataset for android device control. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neu-ral Information Processing Systems Datasets and Bench-marks Track , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=j4b3l5kOil. Rawles, C., Clinckemaillie, S., Chang, Y., Waltz, J., Lau, G., Fair, M., Li, A., Bishop, W., Li, W., Campbell-Ajala, F., et al. Androidworld: A dynamic benchmark-ing environment for autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14573 , 2024. Sarch, G., Jang, L., Tarr, M. J., Cohen, W. W., Marino, K., and Fragkiadaki, K. Ical: Continual learning of multi-modal agents by transforming trajectories into actionable insights. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14596 , 2024. Shi, T., Karpathy, A., Fan, L., Hernandez, J., and Liang, P. World of bits: An open-domain platform for web-based agents. In Precup, D. and Teh, Y. W. (eds.), Proceed-ings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-ing Research , pp. 3135–3144. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/shi17a.html. Sodhi, P., Branavan, S., and McDonald, R. Heap: Hierar-chical policies for web actions using llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03720 , 2023. Sun, H., Zhuang, Y., Kong, L., Dai, B., and Zhang, C. Adaplanner: Adaptive planning from feedback with lan-guage models. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 2023. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=rnKgbKmelt. Wang, G., Xie, Y., Jiang, Y., Mandlekar, A., Xiao, C., Zhu, Y., Fan, L., and Anandkumar, A. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language mod-els. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024a. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= ehfRiF0R3a. Wang, Z., Cheng, Z., Zhu, H., Fried, D., and Neubig, G. What are tools anyway? a survey from the language model perspective. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= Xh1B90iBSR. Wang, Z., Neubig, G., and Fried, D. TroVE: Inducing veri-fiable and efficient toolboxes for solving programmatic tasks. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024c. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= DCNCwaMJjI. Yao, S., Chen, H., Yang, J., and Narasimhan, K. Webshop: Towards scalable real-world web inter-action with grounded language agents. In Koyejo, S., Mohamed, S., Agarwal, A., Belgrave, D., Cho, K., and Oh, A. (eds.), Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , volume 35, pp. 20744– 20757. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022. URL https: //proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2022/file/ 82ad13ec01f9fe44c01cb91814fd7b8c-Paper-Conference. pdf. Yoran, O., Amouyal, S. J., Malaviya, C., Bogin, B., Press, O., and Berant, J. Assistantbench: Can web agents solve realistic and time-consuming tasks? arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15711 , 2024. Yu, W., Gileadi, N., Fu, C., Kirmani, S., Lee, K.-H., Are-nas, M. G., Chiang, H.-T. L., Erez, T., Hasenclever, L., Humplik, J., et al. Language to rewards for robotic skill synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08647 , 2023. Zheng, L., Wang, R., Wang, X., and An, B. Synapse: Trajectory-as-exemplar prompting with memory for com-puter control. In The Twelfth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=Pc8AU1aF5e. Zhou, S., Xu, F. F., Zhu, H., Zhou, X., Lo, R., Sridhar, A., Cheng, X., Ou, T., Bisk, Y., Fried, D., Alon, U., and Neubig, G. Webarena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous agents. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=oKn9c6ytLx. 10 Agent Workflow Memory 

## A. LM-Based Workflow Induction 

As introduced in §2.3, one realization of our workflow induction module is to prompt LMs to generate abstract, sub-routine workflows from the given examples, i.e., experience. In this section, we provide the detailed model prompt, exemplar workflows induced by models, and quality examination on these workflows. 

A.1. Model Prompt 

We provide the exact prompt inputted to the model for WebArena and Mind2Web experiments below. Experiments on both datasets use the same prompt. Given a list of web navigation tasks, your task is to extract the common workflows. Each given task contains a natural language instruction, and a series of actions to solve the task. You need to find the repetitive subset of actions across multiple tasks, and extract each of them out as a workflow. Each workflow should be a commonly reused sub-routine of the tasks. Do not generate similar or overlapping workflows. Each workflow should have at least two steps. Represent the non-fixed elements (input text, button strings) with descriptive variable names as shown in the example. 

A.2. Example Workflows 

We present several exemplar workflows induced on WebArena and Mind2Web, to give a more concrete impression of workflows. 

WebArena Workflows We show one example workflow on each website involved in WebArena. ## shopping: Browse Products in a Specific Category To browse products in a specific category, I need to navigate to the relevant main category. I will start by hovering over the main category menu item to reveal the subcategories. 

hover(’main category id’) 

To browse products in the specific subcategory, I need to click on the subcategory link. 

click(’subcategory id’) 

## shopping admin: Edit and Save Changes This workflow is used to edit specific fields and save changes. To edit a specific field, I need to locate the field and update its value. 

clear(’field id’) fill(’field id’, ’new value’) 

Next, I need to save the changes by clicking the ”Save” button. 

click(’save button id’) 

## reddit: Navigate to a forum section and select a specific forum To navigate to a specific forum, I need to click on the ”Forums” section. 

click(’42’) 

Now, I need to click on the specific forum link based on the forum name provided. 

click(’<forum link id>’) 

## gitlab: Navigation to Repository and Contributors Section This workflow involves searching for a repository and navigating to its contributors to find detailed contribution data. First, search for the specific repository to gather information. 

fill(’130’, ’{RepositoryName }’) press(’130’, ’Enter’) 

Navigate to the “Contributors” section to view contribution details. 

click(’311’) # “Contributors” link 

Obtain and report the required contributor details. 

send msg to user(’ {ContributorDetails }’) 

11 Agent Workflow Memory 

## map: Calculate Travel Time and Distance To calculate travel time and distance between two locations, I will use the directions feature. I will fill in the respective fields and select the mode of transportation. 

fill(’158’, ’FROM LOCATION’) fill(’163’, ’TO LOCATION’) select option(’166’, ’MODE OF TRANSPORTATION’) click(’171’) 

I will use these details to provide the user with accurate travel time and distance information. 

send msg to user(’The distance between FROM LOCATION and TO LOCATION is DISTANCE and the estimated travel time is TIME.’) 

Mind2Web Workflows We present one example workflow in each data domain in Mind2Web. # travel: enter flight locations Given that you are on the flight booking page, this workflow enters the departure and destination city/airport for your flight. 

[link] From Departure Airport or City Your Origin − > CLICK 

[textbox] Origin City or Airport − > TYPE: {your-origin-city }

[link] {best-popup-option } − > CLICK 

[link] To Destination Airport or City Your Destination − > CLICK 

[textbox] Destination City or Airport − > TYPE: {your-destination-city }

[link] {best-popup-option } − > CLICK # shopping: search and sort Given that you are on the Amazon search results page, this workflow searches for a product and sorts the results. 

[textbox] Search Amazon − > TYPE: {search-term }

[button] Go − > CLICK 

[span] Sort by: − > CLICK 

[option] {sort-option } − > CLICK # entertainment: search and select Given that you are on the IMDb homepage, this workflow searches for a term and selects the best match. 

[textbox] Search IMDb − > TYPE: {search-term }

[button] Submit Search − > CLICK 

[button] {best-match } − > CLICK 

A.3. Workflow Quality Analysis 

To provide intermediate information beyond the end-to-end task success, we propose several metrics to verify the quality of the model-induced workflows. (1) Number of workflows : The number of workflows augmented to the memory, fewer workflows is better, whereas agents rely on fewer workflows to achieve satisfactory performance. (2) Coverage : How many steps in the action trajectory are covered by the workflows, higher coverage presumably signals the general applicability of the concerned workflow. (3) Function overlap : How much functionality overlap exists between workflows, we measure this by counting the number of overlapping sub-trajectories ( ≤ 2 steps) between each workflow pair for the same website. Less overlap indicates more maximized workflow management. (4) Utility rate : How often are workflows used by test examples. We evaluate the workflows on WebArena test examples and Mind2Web cross-task test examples. We do not evaluate coverage on WebArena since it requires canonical trajectories, yet which are not available for WebArena. For Mind2Web, we do not evaluate on cross-website and cross-domain test examples since workflows induced from training examples do not have domain overlapping with these test examples, thus less applicable to them. As shown in Table 9, neural-based induction produces 7.3–7.4 workflows per example, which is efficient and do not add too much content to the memory. On WebArena, the induced workflows are used by 0.94 of the test examples, indicating its wide applicability among varied tasks. Further, only 0.08 of the steps between workflows overlap, demonstrating the efficiency of workflows in solving respective tasks. Workflows on Mind2Web, although used similarly frequently as indicated by the high 12 Agent Workflow Memory              

> Table 9. Quality evaluation of model-induced workflows on Mind2Web dataset.
> Metric # Workflows Coverage Function Overlap Utility Rate
> WebArena 7.4 -0.08 0.94 Mind2Web 7.3 0.40 0.20 0.91

0.91 utility rate, have slightly more functional overlap, and only achieve a 0.40 coverage over test examples. However, as the training examples used to induce workflows have substantial task distribution variances with the cross-task test examples, this relatively low coverage is reasonable. 

## B. Rule-Based Workflow Induction 

Beyond LM-based workflow induction, we also explored a rule-based workflow induction method. Our rule-based workflow induction module consists of two steps: (i) experience deduplication, and (2) invalid action filtering. For deduplication, we extract the action sequence of the experience, e.g., extracting CLICK → CLICK → TYPE from the trajectory CLICK(’12’) → CLICK(’30’) → TYPE(’44’, "cat") . We group experiences by their action sequence and randomly select n (n = 1 by default) experiences from each group. Specifically on WebArena, where the task template for each experience is available. We conduct another round of deduplication by grouping experiences by their task template, and randomly selecting n (n = 1 by default) experiences from each group. This process yields diverse experiences from the given set of experiences. Next, for each unique experience, we remove the invalid steps in its action trajectory. Invalid actions means actions that cannot be successfully executed on the environment, because the input arguments do not meet the requirement of the action function. Specifically, we have one rule of determining invalid actions for CLICK and TYPE , that requires the first argument to be a string-formatted integer (which refers to the id of an element in the environment). We remove CLICK and TYPE 

steps if they do not meet this requirement. For example, an experience with trajectory CLICK(12) → CLICK(’12’) 

→ CLICK(’30’) → TYPE(44, "cat") → TYPE(’44’, "cat") will yield CLICK(’12’) → CLICK(’30’) 

→ TYPE(’44’, "cat") . We conduct this invalid action filtering for each unique experience, and take the resulting experiences as rule-based workflows. 

## C. Integrating AWM Offline and Online 

We compared AWM offline and AWM online in §3.2, that adopts workflows induced separately from training or on-the-fly during testing, respectively. In this section, we explore an integration of both sets of workflows, AWM off +on , that injects relevant training workflows to warm start task-solving, but also aggregates increasingly more online-induced workflows to better adapt to test distributions.     

> Table 10. Success rate on Mind2Web cross-task, cross-website, and cross-domain generalization test, using gpt-4 model. EA is short for element accuracy and AF 1is short for action F 1.

Method Cross-Task Cross-Website Cross-Domain 

EA AF 1 Step SR SR EA AF 1 Step SR SR EA AF 1 Step SR SR MindAct* 41.6 60.6 36.2 2.0 35.8 51.1 30.1 2.0 21.6 52.8 18.6 1.0 AWM offline 50.6 57.3 45.1 4.8 41.4 46.2 33.7 2.3 36.4 41.6 32.6 0.7 AWM online 50.0 56.4 43.6 4.0 42.1 45.1 33.9 1.6 40.9 46.3 35.5 1.7 

AWM off +on 50.0 57.0 44.5 1.6 41.8 45.5 33.3 1.1 39.3 44.3 34.1 1.5 

From Table 10, AWM off +on scores between AWM offline and AWM online across three test splits. Rather than an additive effect, workflows induced offline and online are not fully compatible with each other, particularly, the offline workflows seem to impair the generative quality and utility efficacy of online workflows, therefore resulting in medium results overall. 

## D. Efficiency Discussion 

In addition to task success rate, the efficiency and scalability of agents are crucial too. In addition to reporting the number of steps in §3, we provide a more detailed analysis of the computation cost for each of the modules involved in AWM. 13 Agent Workflow Memory 

Besides the action generation step, our AWM approach adds two other steps — trajectory evaluation and workflow induction. We calculate the average computation of all three steps by the number of input, output, total tokens per step, the average number of times that the step occurs per task, and the total number of tokens used on average for a task. As shown in Table 11, the trajectory evaluation step and workflow induction step only take 4.0% and 6.8% of the compute of the original action generation step. Compared to the baseline method (using action generation step only), our AWM approach only adds 10.8% computation overhead, but brings a 51.5% accuracy increase in WebArena tasks, demonstrating the cost-effectiveness of our AWM approach.                      

> Table 11. Computation cost breakdown for action generation, trajectory evaluation, and workflow induction modules in AWM.
> Step # Input Tokens # Output Tokens # Per Step Tokens # Occurance # Total Tokens Action generation 5,663 52.0 5,715 5.9 33,718.5 Trajectory evaluation 306.8 82.8 389.6 5.9 2298.6 Workflow induction 306.8 328.7 635.5 2.1 1344.6

## E. AWM Sensitivity to Example Ordering 

The process of AWM gradually learning increasingly complex workflows may raise the hypothesis that, streaming the examples in an easy-to-hard order may facilitate this gradual learning process and optimize AWM performance. Therefore, we test the effect of example ordering in AWM experiments. We conduct this analysis on the Mind2Web dataset (cross-task split); because WebArena examples need to be kept in the original order released to maintain the validity of the browser environment (Zhou et al., 2024), we could not change the orders arbitrarily to examine this effect. We run the AWM  

> online

approach to focus on test example ordering without being affected by other training examples during the offline 

process. Specifically, we compare the (1) original ordering, (2) random shuffling as a comparison baseline, (3) easy-to-hard ordering, and (4) hard-to-easy ordering. For (3) and (4), we measure the examples’ difficulty by the number of steps in the ground-truth trajectory, i.e., the more steps, the harder the example. The results are shown in Table 12.                            

> Table 12. Success rate on Mind2Web (cross-task) with AWM online in different example ordering.
> Method Element Acc. Action F 1Step SR SR MindAct* 41.6 60.6 36.2 2.8 Original 50.6 57.3 45.1 4.8
> Random shuffle 49.4 57.9 45.9 4.0 Easy-to-hard 49.8 57.8 45.7 4.0 Hard-to-easy 48.5 59.0 45.6 4.2

First, AWM in all example orderings still substantially outperforms the MindAct baseline. Moreover, the ordering of examples does not significantly affect the performance of our AWM approach, where all four example ordering achieves similar step success rates. Coupled with a careful analysis of the derived workflows, we found that our design of the “sub-task level” workflow contributes to AWM ’s robustness to example ordering —- regardless of the complexity of the task, our method can induce usable workflow. Nonetheless, because each website in the Mind2Web dataset only has less than 20 examples, AWM’s robustness to example ordering in relatively small numbers of examples (as shown by the experiments above) may not fully extrapolate larger datasets. 

## F. Exploring Workflow Utilization in Context and in Action 

Besides integrating workflows as agent memory, we also explore workflows in expanding the agent action space, denoted as AWM AS . We leverage the programmatic nature of workflows and wrap each workflow into a high-level function, similar to a shortcut tool the agent can call to perform a pre-determined series of actions (Wang et al., 2024b). Formally, an agent is initially equipped with default, primitive actions P (e.g., click , type ), and AWM AS adds the induced workflow actions 

W (e.g., find place , get place zipcode ) to its action space. The agent can call a primitive or workflow action at each step. When a primitive action is called, the agent immediately takes that action. When the agent calls a workflow action, it will trigger the sequence of pre-determined steps in the workflow. For example, calling the login(username, password) workflow action results in sequentially executing 14 Agent Workflow Memory 

click(box1-id) → type(box1-id, username) → click(box2-id) → type(box2-id, password) 

→ click(submit-id) . The workflow action is completed when all intermediate primitive actions are finished.                    

> Table 13. Mind2Web results with AWM AS variant that alters the action space besides memory augmentation. All methods use gpt-4 .
> Method Elem Acc Action F 1Step SR SR
> MindAct 41.6 60.6 36.2 2.0 AWM 50.6 57.3 45.1 4.8
> AWM AS 51.8 56.7 46.4 3.6

In Table 13, expanding the agent action space with work-flows (AWM AS ) slightly improves the step success rate by 1.3 points, and gets the same overall success rate, 

3.2, of the base memory-augmented AWM. We analyzed agent predictions and found they call workflow actions in merely 18 .5% of the tasks, suggesting a resistance of cur-rent agents to use newly-added actions. Overall, expand-ing actions with workflows seems to reinforce workflows in memory, and brings small extra gains as auxiliary actions. However, workflow actions do not always lead to task success. A representative example is shown in Figure 6. When booking flights, users often input a city name such as “New York,” yet the system often pops up some nearby airports to support next-step search. While one can induce a book flight workflow that enters all required data via a pre-determined action sequence, the action to choose pop-up airports is executed without seeing the intermediate states with available pop-up options, and is not flexible enough to do so. More advanced techniques such as granting real-time state access or dynamic execution loops can be promising to solve this issue, and we encourage future work to leverage the AWM framework to explore these. click(120) # id of textbox under ‘To*’ 

type(120, “New York”) # enter location 

# 1

select(‘New York, NY, US (JFK)’) 

# 2

Depend on the pop up options  

> Action  Environment
> Figure 6. An example of dynamic environment changes that challenge workflow action utilization.

15