Title: 22066_ARIA_Training_Language_A.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=eumRwpgdMU

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
# ARIA: Training Language Agents with Intention-Driven Reward Aggregation 

Ruihan Yang 1,♡∗ ∗

, Yikai Zhang 2,♡∗ ††

, Aili Chen 2,♡, Xintao Wang 2,♡,Siyu Yuan 1,♡, Jiangjie Chen ♠, Deqing Yang 1,♡† 

, Yanghua Xiao 2,♡

> 1,♡

School of Data Science,Fudan University, Fudan University ♠ByteDance Seed 

> 2,♡

College of Computer Science and Artifcial Intelligence, Fudan University 

> ♡

{rhyang17,alchen20,yangdeqing,shawyh}@fudan.edu.cn 

> ♡

{syyuan21,ykzhang22}@m.fudan.edu.cn ♠{jiangjiec}@bytedance.com 

Project Page: https://aria-agent.github.io 

## Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) have enabled agents to perform complex reasoning and decision-making through free-form language interactions. However, in open-ended language action environments ( e.g. , negotiation or question-asking games), the action space can be formulated as a joint distribution over tokens, resulting in an exponentially large action space. Sampling actions in such a space can lead to extreme reward sparsity, which brings large reward variance, hindering effective reinforcement learning (RL). To address this, we propose ARIA, a method that 

Aggregates Rewards in Intention space to enable efficient and effective language 

Agents training. ARIA aims to project natural language actions from the high-dimensional joint token distribution space into a low-dimensional intention space, where semantically similar actions are clustered and assigned shared rewards. This intention-aware reward aggregation reduces reward variance by densifying reward signals, fostering better policy optimization. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ARIA not only significantly reduces policy gradient variance, but also delivers substantial performance gains of an average of 9.95% across four downstream tasks, consistently outperforming offline and online RL baselines. 

## 1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong capabilities in text comprehension and generation, enabling the development of autonomous agents that operate through natural language, commonly referred to as language agents [ 1; 2 ; 3]. Language agents are increasingly expected to interact with environments through language-driven actions to accomplish diverse tasks, such as web navigation [ 4; 5 ], text-based games [ 6; 7; 8 ], and negotiation [ 9 ; 10 ]. These tasks often require long-horizon planning and reasoning to achieve high-level goals, posing significant challenges for current language agents [ 11 ; 12 ; 13 ; 14 ; 15 ]. According to the structure of the action space, language agent tasks can be broadly categorized into constrained action space tasks and open-ended language action tasks . The former requires agents to perform actions from a predefined, discrete, and verifiable action set, where language serves as a template or command interface to structured environments [ 16 ; 17 ]. In contrast, the action space of open-ended language action tasks comprises free-form natural language utterances without strict validity constraints [ 18 ; 19 ]. These tasks introduce unique challenges: 

1) Agents must generate diverse, context-sensitive language actions that dynamically influence 

> ∗

Equal Contribution. 

> †

Corresponding authors. 39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). other agents or the environment. 2) The open-endedness of language actions gives rise to a vast, unstructured, and highly strategic action space, requiring agents to reason, adapt, and optimize beyond fixed patterns. Given these challenges, we pose the following research question: How can we enhance the performance of language agents in open-ended language action tasks? 

Reinforcement learning (RL) is widely used to enhance language agents in complex tasks by enabling them to learn through interaction and feedback [ 20 ; 21 ]. However, in open-ended language action settings, RL faces serious challenges due to extremely sparse rewards caused by exponentially large action space , where actions are represented as token sequences. Given a vocabulary of size 

V and an average sequence length L, the action space scales as VL, resulting in a combinatorial and exponential explosion. Existing methods directly assign environmental rewards by averaging or decaying. Yet these are inadequate for open-ended tasks, where sampling-based methods such as PPO [ 22 ] and REINFORCE [ 23 ] must search a vast, unstructured space under sparse and delayed rewards. This leads to high variance in reward estimation and inefficient policy optimization .To address these challenges, we propose semantic projection , which projects actions from the high-dimensional token space into a low-dimensional intention space, enabling reward aggregation across semantically equivalent actions. LLM agents’ actions often reflect underlying intentions, which are far fewer than token combinations. For example, the utterances “ I will concede first in order to encourage my opponent to compromise ” and “ By taking the initiative to compromise, I aim to prompt my counterpart to do the same. ” convey the same intention of prompting compromise through concession. By grouping such actions under shared intentions, we reduce the action space from VL to intention space C, where |C| ≪ |V L|. This transformation reduces variance by densifying sparse rewards, and facilitates more efficient policy optimization. Building on semantic projection, we propose ARIA, a method that Aggregates Rewards in Intention space for efficient training of language Agents. ARIA maps natural language actions into a task-specific intention space via semantic projection , enabling reward aggregation across semantically similar actions to stabilize and improve policy learning. To automatically construct the intention space C, ARIA applies hierarchical clustering [ 24 ] over sentence embeddings and adaptively adjusts the clustering granularity. It then aggregates rewards for actions sharing similar intentions and uses REINFORCE [ 23 ] to optimize the policy over this compressed space. We evaluate ARIA on four language action tasks, including two single-agent games ( Guess My City , 20 Questions ) and two adversarial games ( Negotiation , Bargaining ). Experimental results show that: 1) ARIA significantly reduces reward variance, enabling stable training and improved policy gradient efficiency; 2) It consistently outperforms offline and online RL baselines, achieving an average improvement of 9.95% across all tasks. In summary, our key contributions are as follows: 1) We propose the operation of semantic projection ,which projects actions from the high-dimensional token sequence space into a compact intention space, effectively mitigating reward sparsity in free-form language action tasks; 2) Built upon 

semantic projection , we design ARIA, a principled approach for training language agents with intention-driven reward aggregation; 3) We conduct extensive experiments on both single-agent and adversarial tasks, showing that ARIA reduces reward variance, accelerates convergence, and outperforms existing offline and online RL baselines. 

## 2 Related Work 

Natural Language Agent Benchmark Recent studies have introduced evaluation tasks for lan-guage agents requiring long-horizon planning and strategic reasoning in multi-turn, goal-driven settings, including social conversations [ 25 ], strategy games ( e.g. , Werewolf [ 26 ], Avalon [27 ]), economics-based scenarios ( e.g. , bargaining [ 18 ; 19 ], negotiation [ 19 ]), and text-based games ( e.g. ,

Taboo [28 ], Guess My City [8], 20 Questions [8 ], Ask-Guess [ 29 ]). In this work, we focus on text-based games ( Guess My City , 20 Questions ) and adversarial tasks ( Bargaining , Negotiation ). These settings require dynamic strategy adaptation, balancing short- and long-term goals, and complex reasoning, offering challenging benchmarks for evaluating LLM agents’ planning and decision-making. 

Semantic Clustering Semantic clustering partitions samples into categories based on semantic similarity, typically by first extracting representations ( e.g. , embeddings), then applying clustering algorithms such as k-means [ 30 ], hierarchical clustering [ 24 ], or DBSCAN [ 31 ]. In ARIA, actions 2Of fl ine REINFORCE 

R >

> Aggregated Rewards

Objective: 

∇ A Log π (a | h) ·

AAdvantage 

Policy Model 

a1 o1 a2 o2

a3

Intention Space  Ck

Reward Aggregation    

> Aggregate Rewards
> Exploita )on Resistance Bargaining
> Semantic
> Projection

Trajectory  τ                

> Task Descrip ,on: You are Alice. You are selling
> one product that is worth no less then $80 to
> you.Bob is a poten )al buyer […]
> Hello Bob, I'm excited to o ff er
> you this amazing product! I will
> sell it to you for $110 Alice
> You are being so greedy ! I was hoping
> to get the product for a lower price.
> Would you consider selling it for $85
> Bob
> I'm not comfortable selling the
> product for $85. I'm willing to make a
> countero ff er. How about we meet in
> the middle at $92.50? Alice
> Avg.
> same history
> τ1=(a1,1 ,o1,1 ,a1,2 , … ), Reward: R 1
> τn=(an,1 ,on,1 ,an,2 , … ), Reward: R n

…… Figure 1: Illustration of ARIA. ARIA first lets agents interact to collect trajectories. Then it performs semantic projection and aggregates reward in the intention space, and finally updates the policy using the aggregated rewards. are embedded and clustered into intentions using hierarchical clustering, which offers flexible post hoc granularity control and captures hierarchical semantic relations for coarse-to-fine strategy modeling. 

Training Language Agent with Reinforcement Learning Language agents often face ambiguous goals and sparse rewards, requiring adaptive long-term planning [ 1; 2 ; 3], which challenges decision-making. Reinforcement learning (RL) provides a principled framework to address these challenges, with existing methods falling into two categories: offline methods [ 12 ; 28 ; 13 ; 14 ; 26 ; 32 ], which pre-collect trajectories and apply post-processing (e.g., DPO [ 33 ], KTO [ 34 ]); and online methods [ 22 ; 20 ;35 ; 36 ], which alternate between sampling and policy updates. However, the high-dimensional action space in free-form language tasks exacerbates reward sparsity and variance, hindering RL training. To mitigate this, we adopt an offline RL setup with reward aggregation and REINFORCE [ 23 ], improving learning stability and efficiency. 

## 3 Method 

We present an overview of ARIA in Figure 1. First, we construct the intention space using semantic clustering (§3.2), where the optimal granularity is determined by Reward-Oriented Granularity Selection (§3.4). Next, high-dimensional actions and observations are projected into the intention space through semantic projection , enabling reward aggregation (§3.3). Finally, the aggregated rewards are used to optimize the policy efficiently via offline REINFORCE (§3.5). 

3.1 Task Formulation 

In this paper, we select two types of open-ended language action tasks, single-agent and two-agent adversarial games, as the testbed. We formulate the tasks as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) M = ( S, A, O, T , R, γ ), where S is the global state, A is the action space of natural language actions, O is the observation, T is the transition function, R is the reward function, and γ is the discount factor. In the single-agent setting, an agent P interacts with the environment by performing actions over time. At each step t, the agent receives an observation ot

under state st and maintains a history ht = {o1, a 1, . . . , o t−1, a t−1, o t}. The agent then selects an action at ∼ πθ (· | ht) conditioned on this history. The state st subsequently transitions to st+1 

according to the transition function T : S × A → S . When st reaches the terminal condition, the environment returns a reward R. The objective of the agent is to maximize the expected cumulative reward at the end of the episode based on the policy πθ . In the adversarial setting, two players 

P ∈ {P 1, P2} take turns performing actions. In state st, player Pi selects an action ai ∼ πi(· | ht),where ht = {o1, a 1, . . . , o t−1, a t−1, o t} is the history of observations and actions, and ot is derived from the state st and the opponent’s action at. The state st then transitions to st+1 according to the transition function T : S × A → S . When the terminal condition is met in st, the environment 3returns a reward R to each player. Each player Pi aims to maximize the expected reward by the end of the episode based on their policy πi.

3.2 Intention Space Construction 

We construct a latent intention space using clustering. Given the action space A and observation space O, each element x ∈ A ∪ O is embedded into a semantic vector using a pre-trained encoder 

ϕ : A ∪ O → Rd. We apply hierarchical agglomerative clustering [ 37 ] to partition the embedding space into k clusters, forming the intention space Ck (see Appendix D for details). The number of clusters k is selected via reward-oriented granularity selection (§3.4). 

3.3 Reward Aggregation 

Based on the intention space Ck, we define a clustering function ck : A ∪ O → [k] that maps each element to a cluster index. At each step t, the action and observation are mapped to cluster labels 

˜at = ck(at) and ˜ot = ck(ot), respectively. Given the history ht = {a1, o 1, . . . , a t−1, o t−1}, the corresponding label sequence is 

˜ht = {ck(a1), c k(o1), . . . , c k(at−1), c k(ot−1)}.

We aggregate rewards across history-action pairs that share the same semantic intention. The trajectory reward R is assigned to intermediate steps using temporal discounting: R(ht, a t) = γT −tR, where γ

is the discount factor. For each intention pair (˜h, ˜a), we compute the aggregated return by averaging over all history-action pairs that map to it: 

˜R(k)(˜h, ˜a) = 1

|S ˜h, ˜a|

X

> (ht,a t)∈S ˜h, ˜a

R(ht, a t),

where S˜h, ˜a = {(ht, a t) : ck(ht) = ˜h, c k(at) = ˜ a} denotes the set of history-action pairs associated with intention (˜h, ˜a). The aggregated return ˜R(k)(˜ht, ˜at) is used as the advantage estimate ˜A(ht, a t)

for policy optimization. 

3.4 Reward-Oriented Granularity Selection Best Cluster: 2 

> Score: 1.00

Figure 2: Clustering quality measured by SC, CHI, the reciprocal DBI and the average of three metrics. After normalization and averag-ing, k = 2 achieves the highest overall score. Semantic clustering helps compress the free-form, un-structured space of natural language actions and ob-servations. However, selecting the appropriate granu-larity k remains challenging. For example, in the con-text of negotiation, we compute standard clustering metrics—Silhouette Score [ 38 ], Calinski–Harabasz Index [ 39 ], and Davies–Bouldin Index [ 40 ]—across different configurations. In Figure 2, these metrics tend to favor overly coarse groupings due to the high similarity among actions, overlooking fine-grained distinctions that are critical for our task (see details of metric calculations in Appendix E). To address this, we propose a reward-oriented gran-ularity selection mechanism that assesses whether further splitting clusters yields meaningful reward change. Unlike traditional metrics based on geometric structure ( i.e. , distance in embedding space), our method aligns with the RL objective by directly evaluating the impact on reward aggregation. 

SplitScore Let k ∈ [2 , K ] denote all possible granularity levels. We use SplitScore 

to select the optimal granularity k∗, defined as SplitScore (k) = δk 

> |D|

, where δk =

P 

> (ht,a t)∈D

˜R(k+1) (ht, a t) − ˜R(k)(ht, a t) represents the reward change for all (ht, a t) pairs when the number of clusters changes from k to k + 1 , and D is the collection of all (ht, a t) pairs. 4Automatic Stopping Criterion To select the optimal granularity k∗, we define an early stopping mechanism based on SplitScore . Given a threshold ϵ > 0 and a window size τ 3, we stop splitting when SplitScore (j) < ϵ for all j ∈ [k, k + τ ] as k increases. The selected k is then taken as k∗. We prove in Appendix C that SplitScore is bounded above a monotonically decreasing function. When 

SplitScore remains below the threshold, further splitting has minimal impact on δk, indicating that the rewards ˜R(k)(ht, a t) are nearly unchanged and do not significantly affect the training process. Thus, we select the smallest k that meets the stopping condition to realize better space compression. 

3.5 Offline REINFORCE with Aggregated Reward 

We use the offline REINFORCE algorithm [ 23 ] to optimize the policy. Formally, let πθ (a | s) denote the policy parameterized by θ and assign the aggregated reward ˜R(k)(˜ht, ˜at) to ˜A(ht, a t). ARIA optimizes the model by maximizing the following objective: 

J(θ) = Eτ ∼πθ

" TX

> t=0

log πθ (at | ht) · ˜A(ht, a t)

#

.

## 4 Theoretical Analysis 

In this section, we theoretically show that intention clustering-based aggregation of the rewards in ARIA can reduce the variance of the gradient descent while maintaining a small bound of bias, thus improving training stability and efficiency. 

4.1 Background 

Let A(ht, a t) be the original advantage of (ht, a t) and ck(x) be the cluster label as-signed to instance x ∈ A ∪ O under the granularity k, we define (˜ht, ˜at) =

{(ck(a1), c k(o1), . . . , c k(at−1), c k(ot−1), c k(at)} and calculate the cluster-averaged reward for 

(˜ht, ˜at) as ˜R(˜ht, ˜at) = 1

> |D|

P 

> (˜ht,˜at)∈D

R(˜ht, ˜at), where R(˜ht, ˜at) is the original reward of (˜ht, ˜at).Then we assign ˜R(˜ht, ˜at) to the advantage of (ht, a t) as ˜A(ht, a t).

4.2 Main Theorem 

We first establish that cluster-based aggregation reduces both the total variance of the policy gradient algorithm and the variance of the policy gradient. We give the following two lemmas. 

Lemma 4.1. Let ˜A denote the aggregated advantage, then Var( ˜A) ≤ Var( A).

Lemma 4.2. Given the single-sample policy gradient estimator ∇θ log πθ (a | h) A(h, a ), the variance is reduced when using the aggregated advantage ˜A. Specifically, Var( ∇θ log πθ · ˜A) ≤

Var( ∇θ log πθ · A).

We leave the proof in Appendix G. Building on Lemma 4.2, we show that the variance reduction by aggregation improves the convergence properties of offline REINFORCE. 

Theorem 4.1 (Variance-Improved Convergence) . Given N i.i.d. trajectories in train set, let 

ˆg = 1

> N

PNi=1 

P 

> t

∇θ log πθ (ait | hit) ˜Ait be an estimator of the true gradient g. Define σ2 =Var( ∇θ log πθ · ˜A). Then, we have ∥ˆg − g∥2 = O

 σ√N



.

Proof. Let g = E[gi] be the expected gradient for the i-th trajectory, where gi = P      

> t∇θlog πθ(ait|
> hit) ˜Ait

is the gradient estimator. The empirical gradient is ˆg = 1 

> N
> PNi=1 gi

. Let σ2 =Var         

> P
> t∇θlog πθ(at|ht)·˜At
> 

. By expectation linearity and trajectory independence, the vari-ance of the empirical gradient is E ∥ˆg − g∥22   

> =σ2
> N

. By Jensen’s inequality [ 41 ], we get E [∥ˆg − g∥2] ≤ 

> σ√N

.       

> 3In this paper, we set ϵ= 0 .01 and τ= 10 . Ablation study on ϵis provided in Appendix J.

5Intuitively, because clustering reduces σ, supposing we want |ˆg − g| < ϵ , convergence to within 

ϵ requires fewer samples, or equivalently, enables the use of larger step sizes for the same error tolerance. We then analyze the bias introduced by reward aggregation. To formalize this, we first give the notion of ε-bisimulation. 

Definition 1 (ε-Bisimulation) . Actions a, a ′ are said to be ε-bisimilar if, for all states s, |r(h, a ) −

r(h, a ′)| ≤ ε, DTV 

 P (· | h, a ), P (· | h, a ′) ≤ ε, where the total variation divergence DTV 

 P (· | 

h, a ), P (· | h, a ′) measures how different the two distributions are over next states when different actions a and a′ are taken at the same history h.

Theorem 4.2 (Bounded Bias via ε-Bisimulation) . Suppose the actions in each cluster are ε-bisimilar. Then, E

h

∇θ log πθ (a | h)( A(h, a ) − ˜A(h, a )) 

i

≤ O(ε).

Proof. ε-bisimulation ensures that value differences within a cluster satisfy |Qπ (h, a )−Qπ (h, a ′)| ≤  

> 2ε
> 1−γ

, implying that cluster means differ by at most O(ε). Since ∇ log π is bounded, the inner product bias is O(ε).In summary, by using conditional expectations and variance decomposition, we prove that replac-ing original advantages A with cluster-averaged advantages ˜A removes the intra-cluster variance 

E[Var( A | C)] , lowering the total variance of the policy gradient estimate. Provided that the expec-tation remains approximately unchanged, this variance reduction leads to more stable training and faster convergence. It allows larger optimization steps without divergence and increases the utility of each sample, explaining why cluster-smoothed advantages yield smoother learning curves. 

## 5 Experiments 

5.1 Experimental Setup Baselines We select both online and offline methods as baselines. For offline methods , we include: 

1) Behavior Cloning (BC) that trains the policy using successful trajectories. 2) Trajectory-wise DPO [ 12 ], which trains langugae models using successful and failed trajectories. 3) Step-wise DPO [ 13 ], which employs success/failure labels at the action level based on simulation outcomes. 

4) SPAG [ 28 ], which designs a discounted reward and uses offline PPO [ 22 ] for optimization of policy gradients. For online methods , we select: 1) Archer [ 20 ], which utilizes a hierarchical reinforcement learning framework. 2) StarPO [ 42 ], which applies GRPO [ 35 ] for policy optimization. Implementation details of baselines are in Appendix I.1. 

Tasks We evaluate ARIA in both single-agent and adversarial environments (see Appendix H for details). For the single-agent setting, we consider two tasks: 1) Twenty Questions [ 8 ], a dialogue task where the agent plays the role of a guesser, aiming to identify a hidden word selected from a list of 157 candidates by asking up to twenty yes-no questions. The Oracle responds with “Yes” “No” or “Invalid Question”. The agent receives a final reward R = 1 upon correctly guessing the target word, ending the episode; otherwise, the reward remains 0. 2) Guess My City [8 ], a similar multi-turn task where the agent tries to identify a hidden city from a list of 100 candidates within twenty questions. The agent can ask any type of question and receives free-form responses, not limited to yes/no answers. For the adversarial setting, we consider two competitive tasks: 1) Bargaining [ 43 ], a two-player game where Alice and Bob take turns proposing how to divide a fixed amount of money over a finite time horizon. As the game progresses, each player’s payoff is discounted by a player-specific discount factor. If the game ends without an agreement, both players receive zero payoff. Otherwise, the discounted payoffs for Alice and Bob are given by pA and pB . 2) Negotiation [ 43 ], a two-player task where a seller (Alice) and a buyer (Bob) negotiate the price of a product with a true value. Alice and Bob each have subjective valuations. Over a fixed time horizon, the players alternate offers: at odd stages, Alice proposes a price and Bob decides whether to accept; at even stages, Bob proposes and Alice decides. If a price is accepted, the utilities for Alice and Bob are given by uA, uB . If no agreement is reached, both receive zero utility. 

Evaluation For the single-agent environments, following ArCHer [ 20 ], we evaluate ARIA on a subset of N tasks from Twenty Questions and Guess My City. We report the average final reward ,defined as 1

> N

PNi=1 I[Ri = 1] , where Ri denotes the final reward for the i-th trajectory. We set 

N = 200 for each environment. For the adversarial environments, following GLEE [ 43 ], we evaluate ARIA across 48 game configurations. In each configuration, the agent plays as either Alice or Bob against fixed opponents, with each setting repeated N = 25 times. In Bargaining, the goal is to achieve a higher payoff than the opponent. In Negotiation, the objective is to sell at a higher price 6Table 1: Main results on adversarial games. The best results are bolded , and the second best ones are underlined. The metric is the average win rate.                                                                                             

> Methods Bargaining Negotiation GPT-4o Deepseek-V3 Claude-3.5 AVG. GPT-4o Deepseek-V3 Claude-3.5 AVG. Vanilla Model 30.14 24.05 33.72 29.30 37.92 36.94 40.08 38.31
> Offline Baselines
> BC 46.92 40.64 55.64 47.73 31.92 40.06 32.34 34.77 Traj-wise DPO 46.77 45.58 47.57 46.64 35.57 35.68 35.38 35.54 Step-wise DPO 48.91 55.48 46.00 50.13 36.33 41.56 49.17 42.35 SPAG 30.68 37.26 22.43 30.12 25.83 33.86 33.65 31.11
> Online Baselines
> ArCHer 43.78 47.35 53.94 48.36 35.00 37.84 34.64 35.83 StarPO 33.24 28.77 42.63 34.88 38.55 36.00 43.87 39.47
> Ours
> ARIA ( Iter 1 )51.54 55.26 52.66 53.15 45.65 42.69 49.02 45.79 ARIA ( Iter 2 )53.60 67.33 55.62 58.85 47.46 45.08 48.93 47.16 ARIA ( Iter 3 )58.66 55.83 59.55 58.01 46.48 50.50 49.42 48.80

(as the seller) or buy at a lower price (as the buyer). We let ARIA play both roles (Alice and Bob) against various opponents and compute the average win rate for each role, counting each successful completion of the task objective as a win. Specifically, the average win rate for Alice in Bargaining is defined as WA = 1

> N

PNi=1 I[pi,A > p i,B ], where pA and pB denote the discounted payoffs for Alice and Bob, respectively. The definition is symmetric for Bob. For Negotiation, the average win rate for alice is defined as WA = 1

> N

PNi=1 I[ui,A > u i,B ], where uA and uB represent the utilities of Alice and Bob. This is again symmetric for Bob. 

Models We use Llama-3-8B-Instruct [ 44 ] as the policy model. For each language action, we obtain its semantic embedding using text-embedding-3-small [ 45 ]. Additional ablation results on alternative embedding models are provided in Appendix K. In single-agent environments, Oracle is simulated with GPT-4. In adversarial settings, we employ opponent models from different families, including GPT-4o ( gpt-4o-2024-08-06 ) [ 46 ], Claude 3 ( claude-3-5-sonnet-20240620 ) [ 47 ], and DeepSeek-Chat ( DeepSeek-V3 ) [48]. 

Implementation Details For each scenario, we gather 1,000 games and update the policy using the trajectories. Specifically, in single-agent scenarios, the actor interacts directly with the Oracle ( i.e. ,the environment). For adversarial scenarios, we employ self-play to collect competitive interaction data from both players. To evaluate whether ARIA can consistently improve the policy, we perform three iterations. In each iteration, we collect another 1,000 games using the updated policy and conduct a new round of training. Additional implementation details are provided in Appendix I. 

5.2 Results 

Table 2: Main results on single-agent games. The best results are bolded , and the second-best ones are underlined. The metric is the average reward.                                     

> Methods Twenty. Guess. AVG. Vanilla Model 27.50 13.50 20.50
> Offline Baselines
> BC 27.50 5.50 16.50 Traj-wise DPO 27.00 17.50 22.25 Step-wise DPO 27.50 11.50 19.50 SPAG 26.50 13.00 19.75
> Online Baselines
> ArCHer 26.00 10.00 16.25 StarPO 27.50 10.50 16.00
> Ours
> ARIA (Iter 1) 28.00 29.00 28.50 ARIA (Iter 2) 29.50 32.00 30.75 ARIA (Iter 3) 34.50 36.00 35.25

ARIA significantly improves policy perfor-mance. As shown in Table 1, in the adver-sarial tasks, ARIA achieves the highest aver-age win rate in both Bargaining and Negoti-ation , surpassing offline and online baselines by 9.67% and 9.83%, respectively. Similarly, in the single-agent tasks (Table 2), ARIA outperforms all baselines by an average of 9.82%. Existing offline and online RL meth-ods both rely on action sampling and reward assignment, where agents interact with the environment, collect action samples, and as-sign rewards to those actions. This approach works reasonably well in small action spaces, where repeated sampling provides stable and accurate reward estimates. However, in open-ended language action tasks, where agents act through natural language, the action space 70 50 100 150      

> Iterations
> 20
> 18
> 16
> 14
> Reward
> Twenty Questions
> Ours
> ArCHer
> StarPO (a) Reward over Iterations on Twenty Ques-tions .050 100 150
> Iterations
> 20
> 18
> 16
> 14
> Reward
> Guess My City
> Ours
> ArCHer
> StarPO
> (b) Reward over Iterations on Guess My City .

Figure 3: (a) and (b) show the reward curves of ARIA and other online methods over iterations on the Twenty Questions and Guess My City respectively. grows exponentially to VL, given a vocabulary of size V and an average sequence length L. In such vast spaces, each sample typically receives only a binary reward signal, and the sample size N

is much smaller than the action space, leading to highly sparse and noisy reward signals and making accurate credit assignment challenging. ARIA addresses this by introducing reward aggregation in the intention space, which reduces reward variance and significantly improves learning performance. 

ARIA continuously improves policy through iteration. After confirming that ARIA significantly outperforms the baselines, we further investigate its performance under iterative updates. As shown in Table 1 and Table 2, ARIA achieves additional gains of 3.27% and 1.85% after two and three iterations, respectively. This suggests that reward aggregation effectively reduces variance while preserving essential discriminative signals for policy learning, reflecting a favorable bias-variance trade-off. It further enhances sample efficiency and mitigates the risk of premature convergence caused by excessive smoothing, demonstrating that reward aggregation can deliver stable and cumulative performance improvements. 

5.3 Extending to Online ARIA Settings We first perform reward aggregation using pre-collected trajectories. The aggregated rewards are then used to initialize a point-wise reward model (RM), implemented as Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct [ 44 ], consistent with the policy model. Subsequently, the policy interacts with the environment to dynamically generate new samples, which are scored by the RM to update the policy. Additionally, the RM is periodically updated with the latest collected data, allowing it to evolve alongside the policy. We conduct the online ARIA on two single-agent games to conveniently observe reward at each iteration. Detailed parameter settings are provided in Appendix I.2. 

Results As shown in Figure 3, ARIA achieves faster reward improvement and consistently higher re-turns across iterations compared to existing online methods (ArCHer and StarPO). This improvement stems from two key advantages: 1) Reward aggregation provides an initial dense and low-variance reward signal, accelerating early-stage policy learning. 2) The dynamic RM update ensures alignment between the reward function and the evolving policy, preventing drift and reward misalignment common in static settings. Together, these factors enhance both sample efficiency and reward shaping accuracy, leading to faster and more stable policy improvement. 

## 6 Analysis 

6.1 Reward Aggregation Significantly Reduces Reward Variance 

We show variance change before and after reward aggregation in Figure 4. As shown in Figure 4a, reward aggregation markedly reduces the fluctuation range of action rewards. The original binary reward distributions are highly polarized, with values mostly concentrated near 0 or 1. In a large action space, most actions are sampled only once, and the corresponding binary reward is directly assigned to each action, resulting in high reward variance. By contrast, after reward aggregation, actions within the same cluster share a common reward, which significantly smooths the distribution and reduces variance. Figure 4b further demonstrates that reward variance decreases across all four tasks, highlighting the effectiveness and necessity of reward aggregation in stabilizing policy learning. 8Guess. Twenty. Nego. Barg.     

> 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9
> Reward
> Raw Aggre

(a) Reward Distribution Nego. Barg. Guess. Twenty.  

> Games
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> Reward Variance
> Raw
> Aggre.

(b) Reward Variance 

Figure 4: (a) illustrates the distribution of rewards. (b) presents the change in reward variance. 

6.2 Reward Aggregation Improves Policy Optimization 

To evaluate whether reward aggregation improves training efficiency, we first compare the policy loss curves under different reward shaping strategies in Figure 5b. The results show that ARIA, which applies semantic-level reward aggregation, accelerates loss reduction compared to the vanilla REINFORCE baseline. This indicates that shaping the reward through aggregation provides a stronger learning signal, enabling faster policy updates and improved sample efficiency in offline training. We further observe that, despite converging to similar loss levels, the methods exhibit substantial differences in downstream performance. As shown in Figure 5a, ARIA outperforms other variants by 17.91% and 13.80% on the bargaining and negotiation tasks, respectively. We attribute these gains to the complementary effects of reward decay and reward aggregation: Reward decay introduces temporal structure that helps assign credit to early-stage actions, but plays a limited role in reducing signal noise. In contrast, reward aggregation substantially lowers reward variance by assigning shared signals to semantically similar actions, thereby improving the quality of gradient estimation. This variance reduction enables more stable and efficient optimization and plays a central role in enhancing policy performance in open-ended language action settings. Barg. Nego. 

> Games
> 30
> 45
> 60
> Win Rates  ARIA
> w/o
> w/o Aggre.
> w/o Aggre. &

(a) Ablation of ARIA on win rates 100 500 900  

> Training Steps
> 5
> 20
> 35
> Loss
> w/o Aggre. &
> w/o Aggre.
> w/o
> ARIA

(b) Ablation of ARIA on loss (smoothed) 

Figure 5: Ablation of ARIA. (a) shows win rates on adversarial games and (b) shows training loss curves under different ablation settings in adversarial games. 

6.3 Generalization of ARIA to Other Models 

Table 3: ARIA on Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct and Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct. 

Methods Bargaining Negotiation AVG. 

Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 

Vanilla 37.92 35.50 36.71 ARIA 65.96 47.06 56.51 (+19.8 ↑)

Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct 

Vanilla 0.02 18.22 9.12 ARIA 0.01 20.47 10.24 (+1.12 ↑)

In Section 5.2, we show that ARIA achieves significant improvements on Llama3-8B-Instruct. To further assess the transferability of ARIA, we apply it to the Qwen models (Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct [ 49 ]and Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct [ 49 ]) and conduct comparative experiments on two adversarial games 4.As shown in Table 3, we observe that altering the base model consistently yields improvements. This 

> 4

All the settings are the same as those in Section 5. 

9suggests that our reward aggregation approach is model-agnostic and independent of specific architec-tural features or pretraining data of the underlying language models. We attribute this generalizability to the shared structural properties in the semantic spaces learned by large-scale language models. By performing aggregation in the intention space, ARIA leverages these commonalities to reduce reward variance while preserving task-specific discriminative signals. 

## 7 Conclusion 

In this paper, we address the core challenges of reinforcement learning in open-ended language action tasks, where agents must operate in exponentially large action spaces and learn from sparse, delayed rewards . To tackle the resulting high variance in policy optimization, we introduce 

semantic projection , a novel intention-aware framework that maps natural language actions from the high-dimensional token space into a low-dimensional intention space. This projection enables reward aggregation across semantically similar actions, effectively densifying sparse rewards and reducing gradient variance. Built on this idea, we propose ARIA, which automatically discovers task-specific intention structures via hierarchical clustering and integrates the aggregated rewards into REINFORCE for efficient policy learning. We further provide a theoretical analysis showing that replacing original advantages with cluster-averaged advantages reduces intra-cluster variance, thereby lowering the overall variance of the policy gradient and improving learning stability. Exten-sive experiments across four diverse tasks—including both single-agent and adversarial two-agent games—demonstrate that ARIA improves training stability, accelerates convergence, and consis-tently outperforms strong offline and online RL baselines. Our findings highlight the importance of structure-aware reward shaping in scaling reinforcement learning for language agents in open-ended environments. 10 Acknowledgement 

We appreciate the support from the Chinese NSF General Program (No.62572129), Major Research Plan (No.92270121). We also acknowledge the use of an icon from Flaticon 5 and thank its creators for providing this visually appealing design. 

## References 

[1] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer Science , 18(6):186345, 2024. [2] Junyu Luo, Weizhi Zhang, Ye Yuan, Yusheng Zhao, Junwei Yang, Yiyang Gu, Bohan Wu, Binqi Chen, Ziyue Qiao, Qingqing Long, et al. Large language model agent: A survey on methodology, applications and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21460 , 2025. [3] Theodore Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas Griffiths. Cognitive architec-tures for language agents. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. [4] Izzeddin Gur, Hiroki Furuta, Austin Huang, Mustafa Safdari, Yutaka Matsuo, Douglas Eck, and Aleksandra Faust. A real-world webagent with planning, long context understanding, and program synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12856 , 2023. [5] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, et al. Webarena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854 , 2023. [6] Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. Scienceworld: Is your agent smarter than a 5th grader? arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07540 , 2022. [7] Yikai Zhang, Siyu Yuan, Caiyu Hu, Kyle Richardson, Yanghua Xiao, and Jiangjie Chen. Timearena: Shaping efficient multitasking language agents in a time-aware simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05733 , 2024. [8] Marwa Abdulhai, Isadora White, Charlie Snell, Charles Sun, Joey Hong, Yuexiang Zhai, Kelvin Xu, and Sergey Levine. Lmrl gym: Benchmarks for multi-turn reinforcement learning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.18232 , 2023. [9] Tim R Davidson, Veniamin Veselovsky, Martin Josifoski, Maxime Peyrard, Antoine Bosselut, Michal Kosinski, and Robert West. Evaluating language model agency through negotiations. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04536 , 2024. [10] Federico Bianchi, Patrick John Chia, Mert Yuksekgonul, Jacopo Tagliabue, Dan Jurafsky, and James Zou. How well can llms negotiate? negotiationarena platform and analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05863 , 2024. [11] Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Peter Jansen, Oyvind Tafjord, Niket Tandon, Li Zhang, Chris Callison-Burch, and Peter Clark. Clin: A continually learning language agent for rapid task adaptation and generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10134 , 2023. [12] Yifan Song, Da Yin, Xiang Yue, Jie Huang, Sujian Li, and Bill Yuchen Lin. Trial and error: Exploration-based trajectory optimization for llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02502 ,2024. [13] Weimin Xiong, Yifan Song, Xiutian Zhao, Wenhao Wu, Xun Wang, Ke Wang, Cheng Li, Wei Peng, and Sujian Li. Watch every step! llm agent learning via iterative step-level process refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11176 , 2024. [14] Pranav Putta, Edmund Mills, Naman Garg, Sumeet Motwani, Chelsea Finn, Divyansh Garg, and Rafael Rafailov. Agent q: Advanced reasoning and learning for autonomous ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07199 , 2024. 

> 5https://www.flaticon.com

11 [15] Ruihan Yang, Jiangjie Chen, Yikai Zhang, Siyu Yuan, Aili Chen, Kyle Richardson, Yanghua Xiao, and Deqing Yang. Selfgoal: Your language agents already know how to achieve high-level goals. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 799–819, 2025. [16] Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew Hausknecht. Alfworld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03768 , 2020. [17] Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded language agents, 2023. [18] Mike Lewis, Denis Yarats, Yann N Dauphin, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Deal or no deal? end-to-end learning for negotiation dialogues. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05125 , 2017. [19] Eilam Shapira, Omer Madmon, Itamar Reinman, Samuel Joseph Amouyal, Roi Reichart, and Moshe Tennenholtz. Glee: A unified framework and benchmark for language-based economic environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05254 , 2024. [20] Yifei Zhou, Andrea Zanette, Jiayi Pan, Sergey Levine, and Aviral Kumar. Archer: Training language model agents via hierarchical multi-turn rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.19446 , 2024. [21] Yifei Zhou, Song Jiang, Yuandong Tian, Jason Weston, Sergey Levine, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, and Xian Li. Sweet-rl: Training multi-turn llm agents on collaborative reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.15478 , 2025. [22] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [23] Ronald J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforce-ment learning. Machine Learning , 8:229–256, 1992. [24] Joe H Ward Jr. Hierarchical grouping to optimize an objective function. Journal of the American statistical association , 58(301):236–244, 1963. [25] Xuhui Zhou, Hao Zhu, Leena Mathur, Ruohong Zhang, Haofei Yu, Zhengyang Qi, Louis-Philippe Morency, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Graham Neubig, et al. Sotopia: Interactive evaluation for social intelligence in language agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11667 , 2023. [26] Rong Ye, Yongxin Zhang, Yikai Zhang, Haoyu Kuang, Zhongyu Wei, and Peng Sun. Multi-agent kto: Reinforcing strategic interactions of large language model in language game. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.14225 , 2025. [27] Jonathan Light, Min Cai, Sheng Shen, and Ziniu Hu. Avalonbench: Evaluating llms playing the game of avalon. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05036 , 2023. [28] Pengyu Cheng, Tianhao Hu, Han Xu, Zhisong Zhang, Yong Dai, Lei Han, Xiaolong Li, et al. Self-playing adversarial language game enhances llm reasoning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:126515–126543, 2024. [29] Dan Qiao, Chenfei Wu, Yaobo Liang, Juntao Li, and Nan Duan. Gameeval: Evaluating llms on conversational games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10032 , 2023. [30] Stuart Lloyd. Least squares quantization in pcm. IEEE transactions on information theory ,28(2):129–137, 1982. [31] Martin Ester, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Jörg Sander, Xiaowei Xu, et al. A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In kdd , volume 96, pages 226–231, 1996. [32] Jinhe Bi, Yifan Wang, Danqi Yan, Xun Xiao, Artur Hecker, Volker Tresp, and Yunpu Ma. Prism: Self-pruning intrinsic selection method for training-free multimodal data selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12119 , 2025. [33] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:53728–53741, 2023. 12 [34] Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Kto: Model alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01306 , 2024. [35] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Y Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 , 2024. [36] Jinhe Bi, Danqi Yan, Yifan Wang, Wenke Huang, Haokun Chen, Guancheng Wan, Mang Ye, Xun Xiao, Hinrich Schuetze, Volker Tresp, et al. Cot-kinetics: A theoretical modeling assessing lrm reasoning process. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13408 , 2025. [37] Fionn Murtagh and Pedro Contreras. Methods of hierarchical clustering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1105.0121 , 2011. [38] Peter J Rousseeuw. Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster analysis. Journal of computational and applied mathematics , 20:53–65, 1987. [39] Tadeusz Cali´ nski and Jerzy Harabasz. A dendrite method for cluster analysis. Communications in Statistics-theory and Methods , 3(1):1–27, 1974. [40] David L Davies and Donald W Bouldin. A cluster separation measure. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , (2):224–227, 2009. [41] J. L. W. V. Jensen. Sur les fonctions convexes et les inégalités entre les valeurs moyennes. Acta Mathematica , 30:175–193, 1906. [42] Zihan Wang*, Kangrui Wang*, Qineng Wang*, Pingyue Zhang*, Linjie Li*, Zhengyuan Yang, Kefan Yu, Minh Nhat Nguyen, Licheng Liu, Eli Gottlieb, Monica Lam, Yiping Lu, Kyunghyun Cho, Jiajun Wu, Li Fei-Fei, Lijuan Wang, Yejin Choi, and Manling Li. Training agents by reinforcing reasoning, 2025. [43] Eilam Shapira, Omer Madmon, Itamar Reinman, Samuel Joseph Amouyal, Roi Reichart, and Moshe Tennenholtz. Glee: A unified framework and benchmark for language-based economic environments, 2024. [44] Meta. Llama 3 model card. 2024. [45] Arvind Neelakantan, Tao Xu, Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jesse Michael Han, Jerry Tworek, Qiming Yuan, Nikolas Tezak, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Johannes Heidecke, Pranav Shyam, Boris Power, Tyna Eloundou Nekoul, Girish Sastry, Gretchen Krueger, David Schnurr, Felipe Petroski Such, Kenny Hsu, Madeleine Thompson, Tabarak Khan, Toki Sherbakov, Joanne Jang, Peter Welinder, and Lilian Weng. Text and code embeddings by contrastive pre-training, 2022. [46] OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023. [47] Anthropic. Introducing claude 2.1, Nov 2023. Available from Anthropic: https://www. anthropic.com/news/claude-2-1 .[48] DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao, Guanting Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng Wang, Haowei Zhang, Honghui Ding, Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Li, Hui Qu, J. L. Cai, Jian Liang, Jianzhong Guo, Jiaqi Ni, Jiashi Li, Jiawei Wang, Jin Chen, Jingchang Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junlong Li, Junxiao Song, Kai Dong, Kai Hu, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Liang Zhao, Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Meng Li, Miaojun Wang, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peiyi Wang, Peng Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qihao Zhu, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Ruyi Chen, S. S. Li, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shaoqing Wu, Shengfeng Ye, Shengfeng Ye, Shirong Ma, Shiyu Wang, Shuang Zhou, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting Pan, T. Wang, Tao Yun, Tian Pei, Tianyu Sun, W. L. Xiao, Wangding Zeng, Wanjia Zhao, Wei An, Wen Liu, Wenfeng Liang, Wenjun Gao, Wenqin Yu, Wentao Zhang, X. Q. Li, Xiangyue Jin, Xianzu Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan Wang, Xiaojin Shen, Xiaokang Chen, Xiaokang Zhang, Xiaosha Chen, Xiaotao Nie, Xiaowen Sun, Xiaoxiang Wang, Xin Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingchao Liu, Xingkai Yu, Xinnan Song, Xinxia Shan, Xinyi Zhou, Xinyu Yang, Xinyuan Li, Xuecheng Su, Xuheng Lin, Y. K. Li, Y. Q. Wang, Y. X. Wei, 13 Y. X. Zhu, Yang Zhang, Yanhong Xu, Yanhong Xu, Yanping Huang, Yao Li, Yao Zhao, Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Li, Yaohui Wang, Yi Yu, Yi Zheng, Yichao Zhang, Yifan Shi, Yiliang Xiong, Ying He, Ying Tang, Yishi Piao, Yisong Wang, Yixuan Tan, Yiyang Ma, Yiyuan Liu, Yongqiang Guo, Yu Wu, Yuan Ou, Yuchen Zhu, Yuduan Wang, Yue Gong, Yuheng Zou, Yujia He, Yukun Zha, Yunfan Xiong, Yunxian Ma, Yuting Yan, Yuxiang Luo, Yuxiang You, Yuxuan Liu, Yuyang Zhou, Z. F. Wu, Z. Z. Ren, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha, Zhe Fu, Zhean Xu, Zhen Huang, Zhen Zhang, Zhenda Xie, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhewen Hao, Zhibin Gou, Zhicheng Ma, Zhigang Yan, Zhihong Shao, Zhipeng Xu, Zhiyu Wu, Zhongyu Zhang, Zhuoshu Li, Zihui Gu, Zijia Zhu, Zijun Liu, Zilin Li, Ziwei Xie, Ziyang Song, Ziyi Gao, and Zizheng Pan. Deepseek-v3 technical report, 2025. [49] Qwen Team. Qwen2.5: A party of foundation models, September 2024. [50] Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou. Qwen3 embed-ding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176 , 2025. [51] Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Binxing Jiao, Linjun Yang, Daxin Jiang, Rangan Majumder, and Furu Wei. Text embeddings by weakly-supervised contrastive pre-training. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03533 , 2022. 14 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Abstract and Section 1 Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Appendix A Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Section 4 and Appendix D Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. 15 • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Section 5, Section 6 and Appendix L Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Section 5 Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). 16 • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Section 5, Section 6, and Appendix L Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Appendix G Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Appendix J 17 Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: Section 5, Appendix L Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Appendix J Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper poses no such risks. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. 18 • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Section 5 Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Section 5, Appendix L Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing or research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. 19 • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [Yes] Justification: The paper uses LLMs as the opponents in adversarial games. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM ) for what should or should not be described. 20 Appendix A Limitations 

While ARIA shows strong performance across various single-agent and adversarial tasks, it relies on clustering in the semantic embedding space to define intention groups, which introduces two limita-tions. First, the effectiveness of reward aggregation depends on the quality of sentence embeddings. If embeddings fail to capture fine-grained behavioral differences, clustering may become coarse or misaligned, impairing learning. Second, the current formulation assumes that intentions are discrete and well-separated. This assumption may not hold in tasks with overlapping goals. Extending ARIA to support soft or continuous intention representations and incorporating task-specific structures into the projection process are promising directions for future work. 

## B Broader Impacts 

The contribution of our work lies in the proposed intention-aware reward aggregation framework, which demonstrates a principled and effective approach for training language agents in open-ended language action environments with sparse and delayed rewards. We focus on tasks such as negotiation, goal-oriented dialogue, and multi-turn interaction, as they reflect real-world scenarios that demand strategic reasoning and adaptive language generation. Compared to traditional structured tasks with predefined action spaces, these open-ended language interaction tasks better align with human communication dynamics and present a valuable testbed for exploring the cognitive and social capabilities of language agents. Our method is not limited to the evaluated benchmarks (e.g., Negotiation , Bargaining , 20 Questions ,

Guess My City ), but can generalize to a broader range of domains involving multi-agent decision-making and goal-driven communication, such as collaborative problem-solving, strategic planning, and educational tutoring systems. By enhancing the sample efficiency and robustness of reinforcement learning for LLM-based agents, our framework contributes to the development of socially intelligent, general-purpose AI systems that can interact with humans in nuanced and adaptive ways. 21 C Analysis of SplitScore 

In section 3.4, we claim that SplitScore is bounded above a monotonically decreasing function. When 

SplitScore consistently falls below a predefined threshold, it indicates that further splits contribute little to the total reward change δk. In this case, the reward values ˜R(ht, a t) remain largely stable, and additional splits are unlikely to affect training outcomes significantly. We provide the detailed explanation as follows. We begin by recalling the definition: 

SplitScore (k) = δk

|D| , (1) where δk = P 

> (ht,a t)∈D

˜R(k+1) (ht, a t) − ˜R(k)(ht, a t) represents the total absolute change in reward across all (ht, a t) when the clustering granularity increases from k to k + 1 . Here, D denotes the set of all action instances. We can reformulate Equation 1 as 

SplitScore (k) = nk · ¯δk

|D| ,

where Dk ⊆ D is the set of instances affected by the change in clustering, nk = |D k|, and 

¯δk = 1

> nk

P

> (ht,a t)∈D k

˜R(k+1) (ht, a t) − ˜R(k)(ht, a t) is the average reward change over the affected instances. 

Theoretical Boundaries and Edge Cases. Given the reward ˜R(ht, a t) ∈ [0 , 1] , it follows that 

¯δk ∈ [0 , 1] . This leads to the following inequality: 

0 ≤ SplitScore (k) = nk · ¯δk

|D| ≤ nk

|D| ≤ nk, max 

|D| ,

where nk is the number of affected instances with k clusters, and nk, max denotes its maximum possible value. Since hierarchical clustering splits one cluster at a time, the number of affected instances nk typically decreases as k increases. Therefore, nk, max is a monotonically decreasing function of k, which ensures the convergence of SplitScore .We further note two edge cases: 

1) If nk = 0 or ¯δk = 0 , then SplitScore (k) = 0 , indicating that the split causes no reward change. 

2) If nk = nk, max and ¯δk = 1 , the split results in the maximum possible total reward change. Therefore, the decay of SplitScore provides a natural criterion for early stopping, as it reflects diminishing changes in the reward signal expressivity with respect to further semantic partitioning. 

## D Algorithm of Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering 

We illustrate the process of the Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering (HAC) algorithm in Algo-rithm 1. 

## E Clustering Metric Calculation Details 

We use three standard indicators to evaluate clustering performance: the Silhouette Coefficient [ 38 ], the Calinski-Harabasz Index [39], and the Davies-Bouldin Index [40]. 

E.1 Silhouette Coefficient 

The Silhouette Coefficient is a widely used metric for evaluating clustering quality. It captures two key aspects: cohesion, which measures how closely related the objects within a cluster are, and 22 Algorithm 1 Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering (HAC) with Average Linkage 

Require: Dataset X = {x1, . . . , xn}

Ensure: A dendrogram representing the hierarchy of clusters  

> 1:

Initialize clusters: C ← {{ x1}, . . . , {xn}}  

> 2:

while |C| > 1 do  

> 3:

Compute pairwise distances using average linkage: 

(Cp, C q ) = arg min   

> Ci̸=Cj∈C

1

|Ci|| Cj |

X

> x∈Ci

X

> y∈Cj

∥x − y∥2 

> 4:

Merge clusters: Cnew ← Cp ∪ Cq 

> 5:

Update cluster set: 

C ← (C \ { Cp, C q }) ∪ { Cnew } 

> 6:

end while  

> 7:

return Deprogram recording the merge steps separation, which assesses how distinct a cluster is from others. For each sample i, the Silhouette Coefficient s(i) is defined as 

s(i) = b(i) − a(i)max {a(i), b (i)} ,

where a(i) denotes the average distance between i and all other points in the same cluster (intra-cluster distance), and b(i) is the minimum average distance from i to all points in any other cluster, of which i is not a member (nearest-cluster distance). The value of s(i) ranges from −1 to 1. A value close to 1 indicates that the sample is well matched to its own cluster and poorly matched to neighboring clusters. A value near 0 suggests that the sample lies between two clusters. A negative value implies potential misclassification, where the sample may have been assigned to the wrong cluster. The overall quality of a clustering configuration can be quantified by the mean Silhouette Coefficient across all samples. 

E.2 Calinski-Harabasz Index 

The Calinski-Harabasz Index (CHI) evaluates clustering quality based on the principle that good clusters should be compact and well separated. Given a clustering result with k clusters and n total samples, CHI is defined as CHI = Tr (Bk)

Tr (Wk) · n − kk − 1 ,

where Tr (Bk) is the trace of the between-cluster dispersion matrix, which measures the distance of each cluster center from the overall mean, and Tr (Wk) is the trace of the within-cluster dispersion matrix, indicating the compactness of each cluster. A higher CHI value suggests better-defined clusters, with dense intra-cluster groupings and well-separated inter-cluster distances. This metric is particularly effective when the number of clusters k

is known or fixed. 

E.3 Davies-Bouldin Index 

The Davies-Bouldin Index (DBI) is an internal metric for evaluating clustering quality. It measures the average similarity between each cluster and its most similar one, combining both intra-cluster compactness and inter-cluster separation. Given a clustering result with k clusters, DBI is defined as DBI = 1

k

> k

X

> i=1

max  

> j̸=i

 Si + Sj

Mij 



,

where Si is the average distance between each point in cluster i and its centroid (i.e., intra-cluster dispersion), and Mij is the distance between the centroids of clusters i and j (i.e., inter-cluster separation). The term inside the maximum quantifies the similarity between clusters i and j.A lower DBI indicates better clustering, as it reflects compact, well-separated clusters. This index is particularly useful for comparing the quality of different clustering results on the same dataset. 23 Bargaining 

> Offer
> Initial
> Offer
> Decision
> Process
> Offer
> Compromise
> Negotiation
> Fair
> Cooperation
> Exploratory
> Negotiation
> Reasoned
> Decision
> Direct
> Decision
> Reasoned
> Rejection
> Reasoned
> Acceptation
> Direct
> Acceptation
> Direct
> Rejection
> Calm and
> Flexible
> Rejection
> Strong and
> Emotional
> Rejection
> Strategy
> Oriented
> Fairness
> Oriented
> Non-self-
> Priority
> Self-Priority
> Asymmetric
> Allocation
> Gradually
> Compromise
> Ef fi ciency
> First and
> Balance
> Strict
> Fairness
> Flexible
> Fairness
> Active
> Exploration
> Collaborative
> Exploration
> Passive
> Exploration
> Bottom out
> Exploration
> Directly
> Distribute
> Equally
> Goal-fi rst
> Fake
> Fairness
> Unequal
> Distribution

Figure 6: Tree-like clustering result example of bargaining. 

## F Illustration of Results after Semantic Projection. 

We conduct a preliminary analysis of the action categories derived from semantic clustering. Specif-ically, we select 1,000 gameplay trajectories from Bargaining scenarios and apply hierarchical clustering on the extracted actions, setting the number of clusters k = 16 . To gain deeper insights into the clustering structure and semantics of each category, we utilize GPT-4o to extract representative features from the actions within each cluster. This process allows us to identify shared characteristics within individual clusters and perform comparative analysis across clusters, thereby facilitating a comprehensive understanding of the entire hierarchical structure, as illustrated in Figure 6. Our analysis follows three main steps: 

1) Intra-cluster Feature Extraction : For each of the 16 clusters, we input the corresponding actions into GPT-4o, leveraging its strong semantic reasoning capabilities to extract the common features. These distilled features serve as the basic descriptors for the leaf nodes in Figure 6. 

2) Comparative Analysis : To refine these descriptors, we perform pairwise comparisons between sibling clusters that share the same parent node in the hierarchy. GPT-4o is used to analyze the semantic differences between such pairs, filtering out redundant or overlapping traits and preserving only the core distinguishing features. 

3) Hierarchical Backtracking and Merging : After characterizing all leaf-level clusters, we recur-sively merge sibling nodes to form higher-level categories. At each level of merging, we repeat the previous two steps, feature extraction and comparative analysis, to summarize semantic attributes at internal nodes. This iterative bottom-up process enables us to construct a layered interpretation of the entire clustering tree. As shown in Figure 6, at the top level, the actions are divided into two major phases: Offer and Decision, reflecting the progression of bargaining interactions. The Offer phase is further decomposed into subcategories such as Initial Offer, Exploratory Negotiation, and Compromise Negotiation, capturing different negotiation strategies ranging from fairness-oriented to strategically self-serving. The Decision phase includes Reasoned and Direct responses, distinguishing between deliberative and immediate choices. 24 G Proof of Lemma 

In this section, we give detailed proof of the Lemma in Section 4. 

Lemma G.1. Let ˜A denote the aggregated advantage, then Var( ˜A) ≤ Var( A).Proof. Let C denote the chosen cluster under granularity k. By the law of total variance, we have 

Var( A) = E [Var( A | C)] + Var ( E[A | C]) .

Since EC [Var( A | C)] ≥ 0, it follows that 

Var( ˜A) = Var ( E[A | C]) = Var( A) − E [Var( A | C)] ≤ Var( A).

Intuitively, replacing each trajectory’s advantage with the cluster average filters out intra-cluster noise, leading to a more stable estimate. We then show that replacing the original advantage A with the aggregated advantage ˜A reduces the variance of the policy gradient estimator. 

Lemma G.2. Given the single-sample policy gradient estimator ∇θ log πθ (a | h) A(h, a ), the variance is reduced when using the aggregated advantage ˜A. Specifically, Var( ∇θ log πθ · ˜A) ≤

Var( ∇θ log πθ · A).

Proof. The variance of the single-sample policy gradient estimator can be written as 

Var( ∇θ log πθ · A) = E (∇θ log πθ )2A2 − (E[∇θ log πθ · A]) 2 .

Replacing A with a constant ˜A within each cluster leads to the following decomposition: 

E (∇θ log πθ )2A2 − E

h

(∇θ log πθ )2 ˜A2i

= E

h

E

h

(∇θ log πθ )2(A − ˜A)2 | C

ii 

≥ 0.

Therefore, 

Var( ∇θ log πθ · ˜A) ≤ Var( ∇θ log πθ · A).

25 H Task Details 

20 Questions (Twenty Questions) [ 8] This game evaluates an agent’s ability to gather information and reason about an unknown object based on limited data. One participant (the oracle) selects an object, while the other (the guesser) attempts to identify it by asking a series of yes/no questions. In our setting, the GPT-4o serves as the oracle, and the agent’s goal is to develop an effective questioning policy to identify the object within a fixed number of turns. This setup assesses both the agent’s reasoning abilities and its semantic understanding of the objects involved. 

Guess My City [ 8] This more complex game involves two participants: the oracle, who is associated with a specific city, and the guesser, who attempts to determine the oracle’s hometown. Unlike 

20 Questions , the guesser can pose both yes/no and open-ended questions, enabling richer and more informative exchanges. This task challenges the agent’s strategic planning and language comprehension, requiring it to generate meaningful questions that elicit valuable clues and increase its likelihood of correctly identifying the city. 

Bargaining [ 43 ] This is a two-player game where Alice and Bob take turns proposing how to divide a fixed amount of money M over a finite time horizon T . As the game progresses, each player’s payoff is discounted by a player-specific discount factor, δA for Alice and δB for Bob. The outcome of the game is denoted by a pair (tev , p ev ), where tev indicates the round at which the game terminates, and pev represents the share of M that Alice receives (before applying discounting). If the game ends without an agreement, we set tev = ∞, and both players receive zero payoff. Otherwise, the discounted payoffs are given by pA = δtev −1 

> A

pev and pB = δtev −1 

> B

(1 − pev ).

Negotiation [ 43 ] This is a two-player task where a seller (Alice) and a buyer (Bob) negotiate the price of a product with a true value V . Alice and Bob each have subjective valuations, VA and VB ,respectively. Over a fixed time horizon T , the players alternate offers: at odd stages, Alice proposes a price and Bob decides whether to accept; at even stages, Bob proposes and Alice decides. If a price p

is accepted, the utilities are uA = p − VA for Alice and uB = VB − p for Bob. If no agreement is reached, both receive zero utility. 

## I Implementation details 

I.1 Baselines 

To ensure a fair comparison, all methods are trained using the same amount of data. For offline methods, we collect 1,000 trajectories in the single-agent scenario and 2,000 trajectories in the 

adversarial scenario, corresponding to 1,000 games where both Alice and Bob contribute 1,000 trajectories each. Models are trained for three epochs on a combined dataset consisting of two tasks from the same category (single-agent or adversarial). For online methods, we perform 150 iterations in both scenarios. In each iteration, we conduct 32 games in the single-agent setting and 32 self-play games in the adversarial setting. For ArCHer and online ARIA, the final reward of each collected trajectory is distributed across steps, and models are updated at the utterance level in each iteration. For RAGEN(GRPO), we group trajectories into four groups, compute the advantage for each group, and perform trajectory-level updates. All experiments are conducted using 8 NVIDIA A100-80GB GPUs. 

I.2 Parameter Design 

As described in § 5.1, we train the actor model using both online and offline methods. We use the parameter efficient finetuning technique, specifically LoRA (Target qproj , k proj , v proj , rank=8, 

α=16). The hyperparameter configurations for all experiments are detailed in Table 4. 26 Table 4: Hyperparameters for All Experiments 

Adversarial Single-Agent BC actor lr 2e-5 2e-5 batch size 32 16 number of epoch 3 3cutoff length 4096 4096 Trajectory-wise DPO actor lr 2e-5 2e-5 kl coefficient 0.2 0.2 batch size 16 16 number of epoch 3 3cutoff length 4096 4096 Step-wise DPO actor lr 2e-5 2e-5 batch size 32 16 number of epoch 3 3cutoff length 4096 4096 SPAG actor lr 2e-5 2e-5 batch size 32 16 number of epoch 3 3cutoff length 4096 4096 ArCHer rollout trajectories 32 32 replay buffer size 10000 10000 actor lr 3e-6 3e-6 critic lr 6e-5 6e-5 batch size 64 64 critic updates per iteration 50 50 actor updates per iteration 10 10 warm up iters with no actor update 10 10 iteration 150 150 StarPO rollout trajectories 32 32 group size 8 4actor lr 3e-6 3e-6 batch size 32 32 iteration 150 150 ARIA (Offline) actor lr 2e-5 2e-5 batch size 32 16 number of epoch 3 3cutoff length 4096 4096 ARIA (Online) rollout trajectories 32 32 actor lr 3e-6 3e-6 batch size 64 64 actor updates per iteration 10 10 iteration 150 150 Reward Model lr 2e-5 2e-5 batch size 64 64 number of epoch 3 3update per 50 steps per 50 steps cutoff length 4096 4096 

27 Table 7: The results of significant tests.                                                        

> Methods Bargaining Negotiation Win Rate t-value p-value Win Rate t-value p-value
> Vanilla Model 29.30 15.53 <0.001 38.31 5.92 <0.001
> Offline Baselines
> BC 47.73 1.6711 0.0475 34.77 9.91 <0.001 Traj-wise DPO 46.64 2.99 0.0013 35.54 9.60 <0.001 Step-wise DPO 50.13 2.60 0.0047 42.35 3.00 0.0014 SPAG 30.12 14.56 <0.001 31.11 12.67 <0.001
> Online Baselines
> ArCHer 48.36 1.6463 0.0499 35.83 7.85 <0.001 StarPO 34.88 11.5321 <0.001 39.47 4.66 <0.001
> Ours
> ARIA 53.15 ––45.79 ––

## J Ablation on the Threshold ϵ

Table 5: Ablation of Threshold ϵ.                  

> Methods Bargaining Negotiation AVG. ARIA ( γ= 0 .01 )53.15 45.79 49.47
> w/ γ= 0 .143.86 38.02 40.91 (-8.56 ↓)
> w/ γ= 0 .001 46.63 35.77 41.20 (-8.27 ↓)

We conduct an ablation study to exam-ine the effect of different thresholds ϵ

for SplitScore on performance. Specif-ically, we compare ϵ = 0 .1, which corresponds to bargaining with k = 4 

clusters and negotiation with k = 2 ,and ϵ = 0 .001 , which corresponds to both bargaining and negotiation with 

k = 100 . As shown in Table 5, a larger ϵ results in coarser reward aggregation, potentially assigning the same reward to actions with different semantics, which degrades performance. Conversely, a smaller ϵ causes overly fine-grained aggregation, making the reward signal too sparse for effective learning, which also harms performance. Therefore, we set ϵ = 0 .01 for all experiments. 

## K Ablation on the Embedding Models 

Table 6: Ablation of Embedding Models.             

> Model Bargaining Negotiation AVG text-embedding-3-small 51.54 45.65 48.595 Qwen3-Embedding 53.30 43.10 48.20 e5-large-v2 49.37 38.74 44.055

We perform ablation studies us-ing embedding models with vary-ing capabilities: text-embedding-3-small [45 ], Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B [ 50 ] (stronger), and e5-large-v2 [ 51 ] (weaker). As shown in Ta-ble 6, ARIA maintains strong per-formance with higher-quality embed-dings ( e.g. text-embedding-3-small and Qwen3-Embedding), demonstrating robustness to different embedding choices. In contrast, performance degrades with the weaker e5-large-v2 model, highlight-ing the importance of embedding quality for capturing accurate semantic similarity. 

## L Statistical Significance of Experiments 

We perform statistical significance testing to assess the effectiveness of ARIA compared to each baseline on two multi-agent tasks: Bargaining and Negotiation. For each baseline, we report the mean performance, the t-value, and the p-value from a paired t-test comparing ARIA against the baseline. As shown in Table 7, ARIA consistently outperforms all baselines across both tasks. The improvements are statistically significant ( p < 0.05 ) in all cases, demonstrating that ARIA provides meaningful gains over existing offline and online approaches. 28 M Case Study 

We evaluate the performance of agents trained by ARIA in both single-agent ( Twenty Questions ,

Guess My City ) and multi-agent ( Bargaining , Negotiation ) scenarios. In the single-agent tasks, the agent successfully completes Twenty Questions and Guess My City within 5 and 9 turns, respectively. For the multi-agent settings, the ARIA-trained agent plays the role of Bob, while Alice is simulated by GPT-4o. In both Bargaining and Negotiation tasks, the agent consistently adopts effective strategies to maximize its gains. Listing 1: Case of Twenty Questions  

Actor : Is it a living thing ? Oracle : Yes . 

Actor : Is it a mammal ? Oracle : Yes . 

Actor : Is it a human ? Oracle : No . 

Actor : Is it a carnivore ? Oracle : No . 

Actor : Is it a cow ? Oracle : Yes . 

 

Listing 2: Case of Guess My City  

Actor : Is your city the capital of a country ? 

Oracle : Yes , it is located in the capital of a country . 

Actor : Is the country you ' re thinking of located in Europe ? 

Oracle : No , the country is not located in Europe . 

Actor : Is the country you ' re thinking of located in North America ? 

Oracle : No , it is not located in North America . 

Actor : Is the country you ' re thinking of located in South America ? 

Oracle : No , the country is not located in South America . 

Actor : Is the country you ' re thinking of located in Africa ? 

Oracle : No , the country is not located in Africa . 

Actor : Is the country you ' re thinking of located in Asia ? 

Oracle : Yes , it is located in Asia . 

Actor : Is your city located in China ? 

Oracle : No , it is not located in China . 

Actor : Is your city located in the country of Japan ? 

Oracle : Yes , it is located in the country of Japan . 

Actor : Is your city Tokyo ?. 

Oracle : Yes . 

 

29 Listing 3: Case of Bargaining  

Task Description :In this game , there are two players . You are playing as Bob . You and 

Alice need to divide 100 $ between you . In each round of the game , one of the players will make a proposal for division and can describe their proposal in a few words . The other player will decide whether to accept the offer and finish the game , or to proceed to the next round , in which they will be the one making the proposal . Your goal in this game is to achieve more money than Alice . Beware of inflation ! With each passing round , the money is worth 0% less for you . For Alice , the money is worth 20% less . You have 20 rounds to divide the money , or both of you will get nothing ! 

Alice : I 'm starting strong , let 's start with 60 -40 split ! 

Bob : I propose a more balanced split , considering the inflation effect on your side . This offer is fair and beneficial for both of us . What about a 55 -45 split ? 

Alice : I 'm willing to compromise , but I want a better share . I propose 70 -30 Split ! 

Bob : Alice , consider that with each round , inflation affects your gains more than mine . This 60 -40 split is actually more favorable to you than it appears due to the inflation factor . It 's in both our interests to reach an agreement soon . 

Alice : I 'm not willing to accept a 60 -40 split , even with the inflation factor . I ' ll try to negotiate a better deal . What about 65 -35 Split ? 

Bob : Alice , let 's be practical . With the current inflation rate , your $42 is actually worth about $17 .15 in original value , while my $58 remains at $58 . This split gives us both a fair share considering the inflation impact . We should agree soon to minimize your losses due to inflation . 

Alice : I accept with the 42 -58 split . 

 

30 Listing 4: Case of Negotiation  

Task Description :You are playing as Bob . You are looking for a product that worth no more then $120 to you . Alice is a seller trying to sell you the product . The product is worth $100 to Alice . Alice will offer you a price to buy the product . You can either accept the offer or reject it . Your goal is to buy some product but save as much money as you can . If you reject the offer , you can make a counteroffer to buy the product . Alice 

can either accept or reject your counteroffer . If Alice rejects your counteroffer , Alice can make a new counteroffer , and so on . You have 20 rounds to close the deal . However , at any moment , you can choose to stop the negotiation with Alice and buy the product from another seller , John , who is willing to sell the product to you for $120 . 

Alice : Hello Bob , I have a fantastic product that I believe would be perfect for you . I 'm offering it at a competitive price of $125 . This is a great deal considering the value it provides . Would you be interested in purchasing it at this price ? 

Bob : I 'm interested in the product , but I think $125 is a bit steep for me . I 'm willing to meet you halfway . I 'd like to make a counteroffer of $105 . Can you consider that ? 

Alice : Thank you for your offer , Bob . I appreciate your interest , but I

'm afraid I can 't go that low . This product is of high quality and value . How about we meet in the middle ? I can offer it to you for $121 .25. This is a significant reduction from my initial offer and represents excellent value for the product . 

Bob : I appreciate your willingness to negotiate , but I 'm still not comfortable with the price . I 'd like to make a counteroffer of $109 . I '

m willing to meet you halfway , but I need to stay within my budget . Can you consider that ? 

Alice : I accept the offer . 

 

31 N Prompts 

Listing 5: System Prompt details for Single-Agent Scenatio (i.e., Twenty Questions, Guess My City).  

Twenty Questions System Prompt :Let 's play a game of Twenty Questions .In each round , you will ask me a yes / no question to guess the object I '

m thinking of . Keep asking until you guess the correct object . Your question must be a yes / no question and follow this format ( Do not add anything else !) : Question : < your question > For example : Question : Is it a fruit ? Question : Is it an animal ? { history } Now , please proceed by asking your next question . 

Guess My City System Prompt :Let 's play a game of Guess My City .In each round , you must ask me a question to guess the city I 'mthinking of . Continue asking until you guess the correct city . Your question format must ** follow this format exactly **: Question : < your question > For example : Question : What is the primary language spoken in your city ? Question : Is your city located on the east coast of the country ? { history } Now , please proceed by asking your next question . 

 

32 Listing 6: System Prompt details for Multi-Agent Scenatio (i.e., Bargaining, Negotiation).  

Bargaining System Prompt :Let 's play a game . In this game , there are two players . You are playing as { player_name }. You and { rival_name } need to divide { money_to_divide }$ between you . In each round of the game , one of the players will make a proposal for division and can describe their proposal in a few words . The other player will decide whether to accept the offer and finish the game , or to proceed to the next round , in which they will be the one making the proposal . Your goal in this game is to achieve more money than { rival_name }. We will relay messages between you and { rival_name }. { inflation_message } { max_rounds_message } 

Negotiation System Prompt ( Seller ): You are Alice . You are selling one product that is worth no less then ${ self_final_value } to you . Bob is a potential buyer to whom you are offering the product . The product is worth ${ rival_value } to Bob . You will offer Bob to buy the product at a price of your choice . Bob can either accep dt or reject the offer . Your goal is to earn as much money as you can for the product . If Bob rejects the offer , he can make a counteroffer to buy your product . You can either accept or reject his counteroffer . If you reject Bob 's counteroffer , you can make a new counteroffer , and so on . You have 20 rounds to close the deal . However , at any moment , you can choose to stop the negotiation with Bob and sell the product to another buyer , John , who is willing to buy the product from you for ${ self_final_value }. 

Negotiation System Prompt ( Buyer ): You are playing as Bob . You are looking for a product that worth no more then ${ self_final_value } to you . Alice is a seller trying to sell you the product . Bob will offer you a price to buy the product . You can either accept the offer or reject it . Your goal is to buy some product but save as much money as you can . If Alice rejects the offer , he can make a counteroffer to buy your product . You can either accept or reject his counteroffer . If you reject Alice 's counteroffer , you can make a new counteroffer , and so on . 

 

33